Engineering Design Decision MatrixGeneral Instructions for Using the Decision Matrix
Constraints and Considerations
Many complex decisions have certain constraints and considerations that must be considered when
making a choice. A constraint is a limitation or restriction. A possible choice that does not meet the
constraint will not work. On the other hand, considerations are factors that you want to consider in
making a decision, but are not “deal-breakers.” For example, imagine you are buying a car. There are
five people and a large dog in your family. Your car must have room for five people and a dog. If it does
not, the car will not work for your family. This is a constraint. You would also like to get a car with good
gas mileage, and you would prefer one that is blue. These factors are considerations, because a red car
or one with only average gas mileage would still work for your family. You would just give more weight
to a car that was blue and had good gas mileage if such a car were among your choices and had room
for five people and a dog.
Using the Decision Matrix
1. List each criterion (or factor) you need to consider when deciding on best overall solution or design.
2. Assign a weight for each criterion from 1 to 5, (with 5 as the highest value). This should reflect how
important you think the criterion is. Thinking about whether it is a constraint vs a consideration may also
help you determine its weight (a constraint should be weighted more heavily). This is a judgement call
students should make. It is important for students to understand that they are not ranking these factors
in order of importance. Multiple factors may have the same importance.
3. For each criterion, score each option on a scale of 1-5 (5 being best) based on how well that option
seems to meet the criteria.
4. Multiply the weight for each category by the score you gave each option to get the weighted score.
Calculate total weighted scores for each option and compare.
5. Students should critically think about whether or not the outcome makes sense overall. If it doesn’t, it
may mean students need to go back and review how they assigned values or weighted certain
categories. Alternatively, it may mean that the matrix is revealing an outcome they hadn’t fully
anticipated, and thus should consider that option more seriously. The more often students practice
using matrices, the more meaningful and reliable this tool becomes.
Sample