http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
An Overview of Various Additive Manufacturing Technologies and
Materials for Electrochemical Energy Conversion Applications
Bulut Hüner, Murat Kıstı, Süleyman Uysal, Il̇ ayda Nur Uzgören, Emre Ö zdoğan, Yakup Ogün Süzen,
Nesrin Demir, and Mehmet Fatih Kaya*
CiteThis:ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658 ReadOnline
ACCESS
Metrics&More ArticleRecommendations
ABSTRACT: Additive manufacturing (AM) technologies have
many advantages, such as design flexibility, minimal waste,
manufacturing of very complex structures, cheaper production,
and rapid prototyping. This technology is widely used in many
fields,includinghealth,energy,art,design,aircraft,andautomotive
sectors.Inthemanufacturingprocessof3D printedproducts, itis
possible to produce different objects with distinctive filament and
powder materials using various production technologies. AM
covers several 3D printing techniques such as fused deposition
modeling (FDM), inkjet printing, selective laser melting (SLM),
andstereolithography(SLA).Thepresentreviewprovidesanextensiveoverviewoftherecentprogressin3Dprintingmethodsfor
electrochemicalfields.Adetailedreviewofpolymericandmetallic3Dprintingmaterialsandtheircorrespondingprintingmethods
for electrodes is also presented. Finally, this paper comprehensively discusses the main benefits and the drawbacks of electrode
production from AM methods for energy conversion systems.
1. INTRODUCTION producesmallvolumeparts maybedecreasedsignificantly.7−9
WhentheIndustrialRevolutionisconsidered,animprovement
Increasing population growth and rapid industrialization
require new research studies to meet these energy demands.1 is expected in the manufacturing process of products. For this
reason,three-dimensional(3D)printingtechnology,knownas
Due to the people’s high growing energy needs, clean and
the AM method, accounts for the basis of the Industrial
environmentally friendly renewable energy technologies may
Revolution (4.0) among new production techniques. AM
provide a sustainable solution. To reduce greenhouse gas
technology provides the rapid production of parts by adding
emissions, many researchers have turned their search to clean
objects layer-by-layer from computer-aided 3D geometry
and environmentally friendly renewable energy sources. The
interestinuseofsolarenergy,2windenergy,3andenergyfrom models without the constraints of traditional machining,
biomass4 applications is increasing day by day. The develop- forging, and casting processes. Among the rapid production
methods, this technology has recently paved the way for the
ment of renewable energy systems will be promising for the
improvement of designs for industrial applications and the
solutionofthemostsignificanttasks,likeimprovingtheenergy
rapidproductionofcomponents.AvarietyofAMmethodsand
supply security, biofuel economy, solving local energy and
the materials are given in Table 1.
water supply problems, and raising the living standard and
employment level of the local population.5,6 However, high AM technologies have a great capacity both to decrease
material waste through the production stages of products and
cost is one of the biggest obstacles for the common use of
toreduceenergyconsumptionbecauseithasbeendetermined
thesesystems.Theproblemofaccesstorawmaterials,whichis
that there is a significant decrease of up to 27% in global
among the reasons for high cost, may provide a long-term
energy demand with the widespreaduse of AM technologies.9
solution for sustainable development in renewable energy
In recent times, these technologies have been widely used in
technologies.Thewidespreaduseofnewtechnologies,suchas
AM, may contribute to reduce the carbon footprint. The AM
method, which is claimed to be a green technology, has great Received: August9, 2022
potential to increase material efficiency, reduce life cycle Accepted: October20,2022
impact, and reduce the need for special tools in the Published: November3, 2022
manufacture of parts. It also provides faster production and
more time savings compared to traditional methods. There-
fore, the energy consumption in required time and cost to
©2022TheAuthors.Publishedby
AmericanChemicalSociety https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
40638 ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
Table 1. Various AM Techniques and Their Materials
process materials methods ref
directedenergy metals lasermetaldeposition(LMD) 10−12
deposition
materialextrusion thermoplasticpolymers fuseddepositionmodeling(FDM) 13−15
powderbedfusion plastics,metalsandpolymers,ceramicpowders electronbeammelting(EBM),selectivelasermelting(SLM)/ 16−18
selectivelasersintering(SLS)
materialjetting polymers multijetmodeling(MJM) 19,20
binderjetting polymers,metalsandfoundrysands powderbedandinkjethead3Dprinting(PBIH),plaster-based3D 21−23
printing(PP)
inkjetbioprinting biomaterialsandhumancells inkjetbioprinting 24,25
sheetlamination polymers,metalsandceramics laminatedobjectmanufacturing(LOM),ultrasonicadditive 26,27
manufacturing(UAM)
vatpolymerization acrylates,epoxides,photoresins,photocurablematerials, photopolymerization,digitallightprocessing(DLP),continuous 28−31
(VP) polymersandceramics liquidinterfaceproduction(CLIP)
different energy sectors to enhance their performance and discussed. A future perspective is presented for the new
increaseenergyefficiencyinthe3Dprintingofproducts.Ithas generation energy conversion applications’ research and
been especially accepted as one of the new generation development (R&D) studies.
solutions for energy storage, energy conversion, and electro-
2. MATERIALS USED IN THE 3D PRINTING METHOD
chemical applications. For example, in traditional methods,
there is a disadvantage to produce flow channels, such as 2.1.Polymer-Based Materials.Polymers are preferred in
electrodes and bipolar plates for energy applications by theAM methoddue totheireasier productionandlower cost
machining methods, in terms of both cost and their comparedtothoseofotherbuildingmaterials.InFigure1,the
geometricalstructures.Therefore,theAMmethodhasrecently
become the lead production system in terms of design
freedom, material savings, and easy production of complex
structures.32,33 It was the first application of the photo-
polymerization method for the 3D printing method. This
method was introduced in the 1980s by Hideo Kodama. He
developed the method for creating 3D objects by curing a
photocuringpolymerunderultraviolet(UV)light.Itisknown
as the stereolithography (SLA) method.34 The lamination
method can be realized by stacking materials on each other
afteralayercontourdefinitionisobtainedwithcuttingtoolsin
the 3D printing process. The lamination method, which is
knownaslaminatedobjectfabrication(LOM),wasdiscovered
atHelisys,Inc.inthelate1980s.Inthismethod,firstalayerof
materialisloadedontothetableandthentheprofileiscreated
bycuttingwithalaserorblade.35Aftertheremainingmaterial
Figure 1. Materials for AM method according to the amount of
is removed, a second layer is loaded on top of the first layer. material consumptionby weight in 2014. Reprinted with permission
According to the type of materials, such as paper, metal, or from ref 40.Copyright2015Nova Science Publishers.
plastic, each layer is obtained by sticking to the previous one
using adhesive or welding methods.36 Another method is an
distribution of consumed polymeric materials for the AM
extrusion-based3Dprintingprocessthatproducesproductsby
methodin2014canbeseen.Plasticmaterialsrepresent99%of
directly depositing material with the help of a nozzle after a
the industry, and they are involved in the development of
series of pretreatments (liquefaction process). This technique structural mechanical compounds, such as metals.39
is known as fused deposition modeling (FDM), which creates
IntheAMmethod,polymershavethepotentialtorepresent
3D printed objects using polymer materials and was explored
manymoreapplicationthanmetalsinmanyfieldsfromenergy
by Scott Crump in 1989.37 The developing 3D printing to sustainable applications and health to biomedical. The
technologyhasprovidedrapidprototyping,whichiscriticalfor filamentsusedintheFDMmethodrepresentthelargestpartof
micro- and macrostructure design in energy applications the industry. Although there are several polymeric materials
because3Dprintingrepresentsanewmanufacturingtechnique available for AM, they vary in the process of 3D printing
for the production of energy conversion and storage depending on the method and their mechanical properties.
technologies in the production of functional materials for Polymers, such as acrylonitrile-styrene-butadiene (ABS),41
energy applications. Among other advantages, AM technolo- polycarbonate (PC),42 polylactic acid (PLA),43 polystyrene
gies offer the unique ability to increase specific performance (PS),44 polyamide(PA),45 andpolyurethane(PU),46 are used
perunitmassandvolumeinthemanufactureofenergydevices in the AM method. These materials are used for low-
with complex shapes.38 performance components or prototype designs. At the same
In this study, the fabrication of 3D printed products using time, polymers such as polyether ether ketone (PEEK),
polymer-based and metal powder-based materials, their polyphenylsulfone (PPSU), polyetherimide (PEI), and poly-
electrochemical applications and coatings, and the studies of phenylene sulfide (PPS) are used in the AM method due to
3D printed products with different geometries are extensively their heat and chemical resistance.47−49 For this reason, the
40639 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
interestinthismethodisincreasingdaybydaytoenhancethe atures (between 210 and 250 °C) depending on the
mechanical properties of composite and nanocomposite applications. A comparison of nozzle and build plate
materials or to acquire new functions, like thermal and temperature values for the most widely used materials in the
electrical conductivity for commercially available polymers.50 FDM method is listed in Table 2.
One of the AM methods, “FDM”, is the most preferred
methodduetoitslowproductioncosts.Withtheexpirationof Table2.ValuesofTemperatureUsedintheApplicationsof
Stratasys’ FDM patent after 2009, the spread of FDM Polymeric Materials
machines in the production of 3D printed products was
increased. This increase in AM method may accelerate the thermoplastic nozzletemperature build-platetemperature
materials (°C) (°C) ref
growth of manufacturing technology of products with the
development of new smart materials, nanocomposites, and PLA 200−210 60
biomaterials.37−51 In energy conversion applications, PLA and ABS 225−260 80−90
ABS-based filaments are the most common thermoplastics.52 PETG/PET 225−245 85 60
2.1.1. Polylactic Acid Thermoplastics. PLA is a thermo- PP 205−220 85−100
plastic material that may be obtained from renewable biomass PC 260−280 110
resources, such as starch, corn starch, sugar cane, or tapioca
roots, and it belongs to the category of biodegradable To trap the heat in the printing area of the 3D printed
polymers.53 It has completely biocompostable properties and products for ABS filaments, the 3D printer should be closed
is able to reduce solid waste disposal problems. PLA-based from all sides. Because ABS filaments can be affected by
polymers are preferred mostly in the developing bioplastics temperaturechangeeasily.Allfilamentsmayemitodorsduring
industry due to their easy availability and low cost.54,55 PLA the printing process. Although PLA filaments do not emit a
materials’ mechanical properties, like tensile strength and foul odor because of its plant-based properties, ABS filaments
impact strength, are lower than polypropylene (PPy), poly- do emit a distinct odor.61,62 Thanks to the diversity in
(ethylene terephthalate) (PET), and poly(ethylene tereph- industrial applications, it has a very important opportunity to
thalate)glycol(PETG)-basedpolymers.Comparedtoconven- improve the properties of ABS and open new areas of
tional polymers, like PPy, polystyrene (PS), and polyethylene application. New application areas may increase its compet-
(PE), PLA has a higher mechanical, tensile, and bending itiveness with other polymeric-based 3D printing materials.
strength. As a semicrystalline or amorphous structure, the Moreover, there are also other thermoplastics such as PETG,
melting temperature of PLA may change between 55 and 180 PET,andPPythatcanbeusedin3Dprintingprocess.PETG
°C. The thermal features of PLA can exhibit structural has high strength resistance and low-cost materials, and they
differences according to their molecular weights and are utilized in many fields such as medical, automotive,
compositions.56 It can be concluded that PLA has a good aviation, building, and electrical-electronic applications.52 On
stiffness, tensile strength, and gas permeability comparable to the other hand, PET is one of the most recycled polymeric
those of synthetic polymers, and it is one of the most materials in high-volume commercial and consumer applica-
promising materials to replace petroleum-based polymers in tionsbecauseitiswidelyusedinplasticpackagingapplications
thepackagingindustrysector.Moreover,inthefutureresearch, as a recycling material in the beverage industry.63 PPy is
PLA will be a low-cost material due to their biodegradable another polymer material and it has gained popularity very
propertiesandsimpleproductionofcomponentsforindustrial quickly because of having the lowest density among
applications. Although, nowadays, it has a higher production commercial plastics.64
costthanpetroleum-derivedplastics,PLA-basedpolymersmay 2.2. Additive Manufacturing of Polymeric Structures
be used in many different practical applications such as for Energy Conversion Applications. Rapid prototyping,
agriculture, packaging/food packaging, medical/biomedical transforming complex structures into products, reducing
industry, energy sector, and automotive industry. printing errors, and improving mechanical properties. These
2.1.2. Acrylonitrile-Styrene-Butadiene Thermoplastics. are some of the main factors that may have increased the
High molecular mass styrene-acrylonitrile copolymers and developmentofAMtechnologies.FDMandthemultijetfusion
butadiene-acrylonitrile copolymers were used to fabricate (MJF) method are commonly used in 3D printing with
bullet-proof polymer boards during the final years of World polymer-based filaments.65 In the FDM method, a thermo-
WarII.Thesepolymershavehighimpactstrengthduetotheir plastic polymer filament is used in 3D printing for designed
low thermoplastic flow properties. ABS is a product of the products. Due to the thermoplastic property of the polymer
systematic polymerization of acrylonitrile, butadiene, and filament, it provides an important advantage for this method
styrene. It has also many properties such as good thermal that allows fusing together during 3D printing. Then, it
stability, high resistance, high toughness (even under cold solidifies at room temperature after the 3D printing process is
conditions), and hardness. Other important features of ABS finished.Layerthickness,width,fillingrate,andprintingspeed
polymers are low cost, high strength, and low thermal of the filaments are the main parameters that affect the
expansion. Moreover, the development of methods like mechanical properties for the formation of parts. Low cost,
injection molding and graft polymerization has increased the high speed, and simplicity of production steps are the main
interest in ABS plastics. ABS also may be uses in many fields advantages of the FDM method. However, it has poor
likedesign,fashion,toys,andmodernart.57,58Thewidespread mechanical properties, poor surface quality, and a limited
useofFDMtechniqueshasbeenincreasedwiththeutilization number of materials are their main disadvantages.66,67 In
of ABS polymers in 3D printers.59 In comparison to PLA Figure 2, the production steps of the 3D printed model using
filaments, ABS polymer filaments require a higher nozzle and the FDM method can be seen.
bed temperature. They require a wide range of bed AsseeninFigure2,thefirststepof3Dprintingistocreatea
temperatures (between 80 and 110 °C) and nozzle temper- 3D object using computer-aided design (CAD) software. The
40640 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
Figure2.Productionstepsof3DprintedproductswiththeFDMmethod:(a)3DCADmodel,(b)conversionSTLfiletodesignedsample,(c)
slicingprocess,(d)3Dprinting,and (e)3Dprinted product.
second step is to convert the 3D object to the STL (standard a “Carbon Black Conductive PLA Filament”. This conductive
triangle language) file format. The third step is to separate PLAfilamentisusedinmanyfields,suchaslow-voltagecircuit
layersoftheobjectconvertedtoSTLformatintolayerswitha applications, touch sensor areas, and touch screen pens. In
slicing program. The fourth step is to set different printing addition,theProto-PastaPLAfilamenthasavolumeresistance
parameters,suchasthenumberoflayers,thickness,andfillrate of30Ω/cmfor3Dprintedpartsperpendiculartothefilament
oftheobjects,andthenitissenttothe3Dprintertocreatethe layers.71 A metal-based conductive PLA filament is produced
product. In this method, generally polyamide 12 (PA12), by the Multi3D company, and it is commercially available as
polyamide 11 (PA11), and glass beaded PA12 polymer “Electrifi Conductive PLA Filament”. This conductive PLA
powders are used. PA12 is widely used in the multijet fusion filamenthasabrowncolorandaverylowvolumeresistanceof
(MJF)method.InFigure3,thestagesoftheMJFmethodcan 0.006 Ω/cm. This filament is used in many fields, such as
be seen. electricalcircuit,electrochemical,andsensorapplications.72 In
the literature, Proto-Pasta, Black Magic, and Electrifi
Conductive PLA Filaments have been used widely in 3D
printingmethodsinelectrochemicalapplications.Forexample,
Vernardouetal.73preparedelectrodesforlithium-ionbatteries
using 3D printing with a graphene-based PLA filament. They
fabricated the electrodes with a 3D printer, which had a dual
extruder. They used a conductive PLA filament with a
resistance of 0.6 Ω/cm. They also investigated the electro-
chemicalpropertiesofthe3Dprintedelectrodesina1MLiCl
Figure 3. Demonstration of the MJF method involving the aqueous solution. They concluded that graphene-based
application of a polymer powder layer. Reprinted with permission conductive PLA filaments can be used as high-performance
fromref 68.Copyright2018 Elsevier. electrodematerials.74,75Inrecentyears,theinvestigationof3D
printing methods in electrochemical application areas has
increased.76−79 Electrodes for electrochemical energy con-
In this method,theproductionstepis startedbydeposition
versionreactionshavebeenobtainedas3Dprintedwithmetal
ofalayerofPApowderontheplate.Ablackinkfusingagentis
and polymer-based materials. At the same time, 3D printing
applied to the powder bed and contains an infrared absorbing
technology has provided a new approach to material
agent. Moreover, a substance is added to the powder bed to
production for a variety of applications because of their low
prevent the fusion of the particles and to enhance resolution.
costs.Başetal.80preparedthe3Dprintedanodeelectrodesfor
In this method, polymer heating is obtained as the melting
microbial electrolysis cells using conductive PLA filament
agent absorbs the IR radiation and transforms it into thermal
(copper-basedElectrififilament).Toincreasethemasstransfer
energy that allows the material to fuse by passing planar
inside the cell, electrodes have been designed in different
infrared rays over the powder bed to form a layer. Then, the
geometries(rod,1-cycledspiral,2-cycledspiral,3-cycledspiral,
build plate moves down to form the 3D part, and this process
is repeated as a layer-by-layer production.68 and 4-cycled spiral) and produced using the 3D printing
2.2.1. Conductive Polymer-Based Materials and Electro- method. They used cheese whey wastewater as an electrolyte,
chemicalApplications.PLAandABSpolymerthermoplastics’ and a two-chamber microbial electrolysis cell with different
shaped 3D printed electrodes to perform the electrochemical
electrical conductivity can be increased by the addition of
various conductive materials. Conductive materials for 3D analyses. They interpreted that the organic content of the
printingareusuallyobtainedusingmetal,carbon,andpolymer waste and the electrode geometry increases the microbial
composites. By the addition of different conductive carbon electrolysis performance and hydrogen production. In the
materials (such as graphene, carbon black, nanofibers, and literature, many reports on 3D printable polymer materials
carbon nanotubes) in different ways, composite materials gain
havebeenpresentedusingPLA/graphenefilaments,81,82ABS/
conductive properties.69 For example, a graphene-based PLA carbon black filaments,83 polypropylene/carbon black fila-
filament is produced by Black Magic 3D (BM), and it is ments,84 polybutylene terephthalate/carbon nanotube/gra-
commercially available as a “Conductive Graphene PLA phene,85 and carbon nanofiber/graphite/polystyrene compo-
Filament”. The black-colored BM PLA filament has a 0.6 Ω/ site filaments.86 In the production of 3D printed electrodes
cmvolumeresistivityvalue.ThisconductivePLAfilamenthas usingthermoplasticmaterials,carbonnanotube,graphene,and
mechanical strength higher than that of nonconductive PLA carbon black materials were mixed to increase the electrical
and ABS filaments. Thus, conductive graphene/PLA filaments conductivity of electrodes.87,88 However, electrochemical or
are utilizedin many applicationareas,such as sensors, printed physical deposition techniques were required to improve their
circuits, telecommunications, medical devices, aerospace, and conductivity to the desired level. It increases both the
automotive sectors.70 A carbon-based PLA filament is electrochemical activities and conductivity of the electrodes
produced by Proto-Pasta, and it is commercially available as by deposition with electrochemically active nanomaterials,
40641 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
Table 3. 3D Printed Electrodes’ Electrochemical Coating Applications
3Dprintingmethod filaments applicationfield coatingmaterial coatingprocess ref
FDM graphene/PLAfilament electrode nickel−copper electrochemical 78
FDM conductivecarbon-PLAfilament electrode nickel−copper electrochemical 95
FDM BlackMagicPLAfilament electrode gold electrochemical 89
FDM BlackMagicPLAfilament electrode nickel−platinum electrochemical 96
FDM BlackMagicPLAfilament electrode nickel−iron electrochemical 99
FDM conductivecarbon-PLAfilament electrode nickel electrochemical 100
FDM ElectrifiPLAfilament electrode copper electrochemical 101
FDM BlackMagicPLAfilament graphene/PLAcompositeelectrode bismuth electrochemical 102
FDM graphene/PLAfilament electrode nickel electrochemical 103
FDM Proto-PastaPLAfilament battery/electrode zinc−copper electrochemical 104
FDM ABSresin compositeelectrode copper electrochemical 105
FDM BlackMagicPLAfilament electrode molybdenumsulfide electrochemical 106
such as graphene and polypyrene,89 as well as noble metals.90 reaction(OER)andhydrogenevolutionreaction(HER)using
Moreover, commercially available PLA and ABS filaments in the FDM method. They produced graphene/PLA electrodes
3D printing technology have provided an advantage in the for HER with a commercially available conductive filament
manufacturing of the electrodes without the need for an calledBlackMagic.Theystatedthatthe3Dprintedgraphene/
extrusionstep.Forexample,BinHamzahetal.91produced3D PLA electrode exhibited low HER catalytic activity because of
printedABS/blackcarbonelectrodesbytheFDMmethodand their poor electrical conductivity. Production of 3D printed
investigatedtheirelectrochemicalbehavior.Theyprepared3D conductive materials is currently limited in research level for
printed electrodes in both horizontal and vertical directions. the most applications. Especially, for conductive polymeric
When the performance of the electrodes was compared, they filaments, there are gaps for improving electrical and
observed that the vertically printed 3D printed electrode conductive properties. In another study, Hüner et al.96
showedamoreadvancedcurrentthanthehorizontallyprinted prepared graphene-based 3D printed electrodes using the 3D
electrode. Moreover, they concluded that the conductive printing method and then were co-deposited with different
surface areas of all 3D printed electrodes were equal in their molar ratios of Ni and Pt to examine the HER features of the
capacitive measurements. Electrochemical activation of gra- electrodes in the alkaline medium. In the electrochemical
phene/polymer-based filaments are also another issue for the measurementsofthepreparedelectrodes,theydeterminedthat
electrochemical energy conversion studies.92 Thanks to the the uncoated graphene-based electrode had the least HER
activation techniques, the amount of PLA is reduced to kinetic activity in an alkaline medium. However, they stated
improvetheelectrode’sconductivemedia.Joãoetal.93studied that HER activities increased when they coated the electrodes
the use of 3D printed electrodes for fuel bioethanol quality withNiandPtelements.Conductivegraphene-based,carbon-
controlusingtheFDMmethod.Theelectrodeswereprepared based, and metal-based polymeric filaments could allow
by a mixture of carbon black and Proto-Pasta PLA filaments. production of novel 3D printed electrodes for electrochemical
Theelectrodeswereproducedinhollowcubesof4cm×4cm applications.Toincreasetheelectricalconductivityandkinetic
with a wall thickness of 2 mm. Prior to using the electrodes, activity of the 3D printed electrodes it is necessary to adjust
theyappliedapolishingprocesstopreventpossibleleaks.They the printing parameters and electrochemical coating on the
also performed an optimized chemical/electrochemical pro- electrode surface with a thin film. 3D printed electrodes also
cessing step in the electrochemical cell. Then, nonconductive can be used for electrochemical analysis, by replacing
polymericmaterialisremovedfromthesurfaceoftheworking traditional carbon electrodes. For example, Akshay Kumar et
electrode to provide higher conductive layers. Their work al.97 prepared electrodes by 3D printing and used materials
concluded that the 3D printed CB/PLA electrode has with high catalytic efficiency to improve their electrochemical
exhibited a good conductivity at low currents after chemical performance. Then, they used an easy and cost-effective dip-
or electrochemical surface treatment, and thus successfully coatingtechniqueforthecoatingoftheelectrodes.Toexamine
completed for fuel bioethanol analysis. To improve the thecatalyticandkineticactivitiesof the3Dprintedelectrodes
conductivity of PLA-based conductive filaments, electro- for HER reactions, the electrodes were coated with different
chemical Cu coating is also a useful method.94 Application transitionmetals,suchasWS ,WSe ,MoS ,andMoSe .They
2 2 2 2
of Cu coating can provide an opportunity for using different concluded that using dip-coated 3D printed electrodes in
shaped geometries to design electrodes, capacitors, sensors, energy conversion applications improved the surface proper-
and electrical circuits. Hüner et al.95 prepared electrodes by a ties. Moreover, they also stated that the surfaces of the 3D
3D printing method using carbon/conductive PLA filament. printed electrodes can be coated with various transition or
Toincreasetheconductivityandelectrochemicalperformance noble metals, and they may be used in electrochemical
of the electrodes, Ni−Cu binary coatings of different volume applications in future electronics, sensor, and energy storage
ratios were deposited electrochemically on the 3D printed systems. Siowwoon et al.98 prepared 3D printed nanocarbon/
electrodes. According to their results, the kinetic performance PLA electrodes with MoS -coated for photoassisted electro-
2
ofNi−Cu-coated3Dprintedelectrodesincreasedcomparedto catalytic HER using the atomic layer deposition (ALD)
theuncoated3Dprintedelectrode.Moreover,theydetermined method and optimized the ALD process at low temperatures.
that the resistance value of the Ni−Cu-coated 3D printed ThecoatingofMoS onthe3Dprintednanocarbonelectrodes
2
electrodesdecreasedby99.5%.Inanotherstudy,Fosteretal.81 is changed between 38 and 900 ALD cycles, which is
produced 3D printed electrodes for the oxygen evolution performed at low deposition temperature. They explained
40642 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
that the prepared electrodes have higher electrocatalytic how 3D printed novel electrodes act in electrochemical
activity, reaching an overpotential of 480 mV at lower coating applications.109 3D printed electrodes will be able to explore
cycles. Moreover, they stated that the ALD deposition novel areas for electrochemical devices and it contributes to
technique is suitable to produce complex structures with new applications where electrodes may be designed in
ambiguous areas, like 3D printed objects. A list of electro- extraordinary geometries for battery performance where
chemicalcoatingsofvariousmetalsontheelectrodesprepared traditional geometries (cylindrical, planar, button, etc.) do
by the 3D printing method is given in Table 3. not perform well.
Kim et al.107 produced 3D printed objects using three 2.3. Metal-Based Materials. Metal-based materials have
different commercially available thermoplastic-based conduc- higher demand than polymeric-based conductive PLA
tive filaments (Electrifi, Black Magic, and Proto-Pasta). Then, filaments in electrochemical energy conversion applications
they electrochemically coated the 3D printed objects with due to their higher conductivity values. Materials, like Ti,110
copper for 5, 15, 30, and 60 min. They investigated the Ti Al V alloy,111,112 Fe−Mn alloy,113 bronze,114 Al6061,115
6 4
electricalpropertiesofthe3Dprintedobjectsafterthecopper Al3003,116 nickel,117 stainless steel (SS),118−120 and copper121
coating process. According to their results, the 3D printed areusedinametal-based3Dprintingmethod.Inthismethod,
sample prepared using the Electrifi filament and coated with metal powders with particle sizes ranging from 50 to 100 μm
copper for 60 min was the best electrode. They also claimed areutilized.Theuseofpowderswithsmallparticlesizesallows
that the copper coating reduces the electrical resistance, theformationofhomogeneouslayers.Whentheparticlesizeis
increases thermal stability, and current density of the decreased, the minimum compressible layer thickness value is
electrodes. Dos Santos et al.99 prepared 3D printed PLA/ reduced.Powderswithlargeparticlesizescauseuncontrollable
graphene-basedelectrodesforOERreactionsandperformeda porosity in the produced parts.122 Binders such as liquid glue
coatingprocessontheelectrodewithNi−Fe(oxy)hydroxideas or laser beam are used as binding agents to glue the powders
an electrocatalyst. They stated that the 3D printed PLA/ into the desired structural form.76 During the AM process,
grapheneelectrodewasaneffectiveelectrocatalystagainstOER after the solid layer is formed, the second layer of powder is
reaction.Theyconcludedthata10%contributionofFeinthe spread across the previous layer in preparation for other
coating solution had significant kinetic activity for OER and bonding operations.123 In general, a lot of different materials
the initial potential of OER reactions was comparable to areusedintheformofsmallparticlesofceramic,wood,acrylic,
iridium(Ir)catalysts.FortheNi-coated3Dprintedelectrodes, marble, and metal powders. One of the key advantages of this
another study was conducted by Bui et al.100 for HER and technology is that unbound powder particles act as a support
OER performance in alkaline media. They produced 3D material during the printing process. Therefore, any support
printedelectrodesusingconductivecarbonPLAfilament.The material is not necessary for the printing process. Moreover,
3D printed electrodes were electrochemically coated with after theprinting process is finished,all theremaining powder
nickel(Ni)inanalkalineenvironment.AccordingtotheirCV particlescanberecoveredeffectively.Thus,metalprinterswill
results,theystatedthatoxidationandreductionpeaksoccurred be in a good level in five years, and they may be a game
inthepositiveandnegativescanninglimitsforOERandHER. changer in production industry.
Asagraphene-basedBlackMagicPLAapplication,Iffelsberger 2.3.1. Metallic Additive Manufacturing Methods and
et al.106 prepared electrodes by 3D printing. They deposited Their Electrochemical Applications. As a good electrode
electrochemically MoS on the surfaces of the prepared production method, the metallic AM technique has generated
x
electrodes and the coating of MoS provided an excellent much interest in electrochemical energy conversion studies. It
x
electrochemical activity for HER in an acidic medium (0.5 M is possible to use many production techniques and surface
H SO ). As another electrochemical energy conversion modification methods in metallic 3D printed parts. Develop-
2 4
application,graphene-basedconductivePLA-based3Dprinted ment in the application of AM has become very popular in
electrodes were also studied for photoelectrochemical sensors electrochemical applications like battery production in desired
and supercapacitor applications in the form of a circular disk. geometries, biosensors, supercapacitors, and fuel cell systems,
3Dprintedelectrodesforsupercapacitorapplicationsexhibited etc. Because it is possible to bind powder particles together
a specific capacitance of 98.37 Fg−1 and it has also supplied using high-power laser beams to fuse powder particles just
that promising capacitance performance with stable cycling below their melting point with SLS or reach their melting
stability to 1000 charge/discharge cycles.108 Utilizing of temperature with SLM to combine the powder particles.124
conductive materials are appropriate for 3D printing may These laser beam coupling systems can be used in titanium,
offer novel electrodes for electrochemical applications. steel, aluminum, bronze, and nickel, or precious-metal-based
Morphological and structural properties of electrodes used in alloys.125−127Itispossibletousemanyproductiontechniques
electrochemical applications can be arranged according to andsurfacemodificationmethodsinmetallic3Dprintedparts.
printing parameters. The composition, material, and pretreat- Development in the application of AM has become very
mentparametersofthepolymerfilamentsareimportantinthe popularinelectrochemicalapplicationslikebatteryproduction
preparation process of the 3D printed electrodes. The infill indesiredgeometries,biosensors,supercapacitors,andfuelcell
ratio, the print layer thickness, and printing orientation of systems, etc. SLS and SLM techniques are some of the most
electrodes are prepared using the FDM method can all be preferredmetal-based3Dprintings.Apartfromthesemethods,
changed, and so researchers may have an opportunity to the EBM method, which uses electron beams instead of lasers
explain whether these parameters can change the electro- to bindmetal powders,is one of theotherpreferred methods.
chemical properties of carbon and graphene-based electrodes. This method is seen as an alternative to the SLM
Asanimportantissue,changingtheshapeandsizeofdifferent technique.128,129 The powder bed binder jetting (PBBJ)
electrodes with complex geometries have not yet been method forms metal powders using a liquid binder. In this
sufficiently investigated. Moreover, due to the constraints in method, the sintering or pressing method should be used to
producing different geometric shapes, little is known about improve the mechanical properties.23 In the powder directed
40643 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
energy deposition (PDED) or direct laser metal deposition Moreover, the SLM 3D printed parts’ bond strength is higher
(DLMD)method,themetalpowdercomingtotheactivearea than that of the SLS 3D printed parts. In general, the
iscalledthemeltingpool.Then,itismeltedwithaheatsource commercial SLM3D printingprocess uses20−50μmparticle
focused on this point for solid object formation.130,131 In the size metal powders to print metal layers between 20 and 100
electrochemical energy conversion systems, porous electrodes μm thickness.137 It is difficult to further reduce the size of the
show high performance in industrial processes because the metalparticlesduetopostpressstructuraldefectsandtechnical
larger surface area can offer major advantages over electrodes difficulties. The minimum feature size reported for SLM is in
duetotheirhighermasstransfer.Forexample,Arenasetal.132 therangeof40−200μm.138Asapromisingenergyconversion
fabricated the highly porous SS structure with the M2Multi- application,AmbrosiandPumera139investigatedthehydrogen
laser (Concept Laser GmbH) 3D printing device using the production performance of the SS electrode structure
SLM method. It was electrochemically coated with Ni in an produced by the SLM method. They stated that the SS
acidicbathsolutionusingarectangularchannelflowcell.They electrodeproducedbytheSLMmethodwasconductive,butit
concludedthatthemasstransportpropertiesofthe3Dprinted had poor catalytic properties against hydrogen and oxygen
Ni-coated SS electrode were better than typical planar and evolution reactions. To provide higher catalytic activity and
expanded metal structures. In another study, Ibrahim et al.133 corrosion resistance, Ni, Pt, and IrO were coated on SS
2
producedSSelectrodesusingtheSLMtechnique.Theyaimed electrode surfaces. In Figure 5, basket-shaped electrode
toobtainporouselectrodeswithincreasedsurfaceareaforuse production procedures in the SLM method can be seen.
in the electrochemical field. For this purpose, they tried to
determine the most suitable printing parameters using A
Concept Laser Mlab Cusing brand metal printer. They
concluded that, by low laser power and high scanning speed,
porousstructureswouldprintmoreappropriately.Inaddition,
high-costequipmentandmethodswereusedfortheprocessing
of the metallic materials. In metallic AM, objects may be
produced in high precision with desired dimensions and
details. In 3D printed products from the metal powders, it is
seen that there is a great advantage in the desired geometries.
Thanks to the AM method, it is possible to obtain electrodes Figure 5. Production steps of an electrode produced by the SLM
with high surface area. As a result of coating the produced method. Reprinted with permission from ref 139. Copyright 2018
productsusingdifferentAMmethods,propertiesofpartssuch John Wiley andSons.
as higher strength, corrosion resistance, conductivity, and
electrocatalytic activity can be enhanced for any applications. As seen in Figure 5, a coated basket-shaped electrode was
The ability to produce unique geometries in desired obtained successfully, and the direct electrolysis process may
dimensions means that a wide range of effective systems may be used for similar structures. In another study, Ambrosi et
be achieved in electrodes for many applications. These al.140 produced SS electrodes with helical structures by the
advantageous of metallic AM undoubtedly provides the SLM method. They coated thin film IrO to increase the
2
revolutionary development of electrodes used in this field. In catalytic activity of SS electrodes. In Figure 6, helical-shaped
summary, that great innovations would be possible in the use electrodes with dimensions ranging from 1.5 to 9 cm can be
of AM method in the field of electrochemistry. seen.
2.3.1.1. Selective Laser Melting Method. In the SLM
method,thepowderparticlesarecompletelymeltedduetothe
significantly high laser melting process.134,135 In Figure 4, the
schematic illustration of the fundamental working principle of
the SLM method can be seen.
Thisprocessismoresuitabletocreatedensemetalparts.In
this technique, the surface roughness of the samples is higher
than the other electrodes produced by the SLS technique.136
Figure 6. Helical SS electrodes produced by the SLM method.
Reprintedwithpermissionfromref140.Copyright2016JohnWiley
and Sons.
When the electrochemical performance of the IrO -coated
2
SSelectrodewascomparedwiththeglassycarbonelectrode.It
was observed that the IrO -coated SS electrode had a lower
2
initial potential than the glassy carbon electrode. In another
study, Browne et al.141 used ALD in combination with metal
3Dprintingtocreateactivemetal-basedelectrodes.Thus,they
aimed to produce highly corrosive 3D printed electrodes
without the need for any coating. While producing the SS
Figure 4.Workingprinciple ofthe SLM method. electrodes with the SLM method, they optimized the activity
40644 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
by adjusting the TiO layer thickness with the ALD method. metallic powder by the SLM method. After the 3D printing
2
The schematic representation of the SLM and ALD methods process,itwaselectrochemicallycoatedwithPttoincreasethe
can be seen in Figure 7. catalyticactivityoftheelectrodesample.Accordingtoauthors’
knowledgethisstudyhasdemonstratedforthefirsttimeahigh
surface area printed electrode with an integrated reactant
deliverysystem.AsanotherapplicationfortheSLMtechnique,
Zhao et al.144 fabricated titanium interdigitated electrodes
usingtheSLMmethod.Designoftheinterdigitatedelectrodes
can be seen in Figure 9.
Figure 7. Preparation of electrodes using the SLM method and
coating of the electrodes using the ALD method. Reprinted with
permission fromref 141.Copyright2019John Wileyand Sons.
As a photoelectrochemistry application, Lee et al.142
investigated fabricating metal-based 3D printed photoelectr-
Figure 9. Interdigitated electrodes prepared by the SLM method.
odes. These electrodes consisted of conical arrays, and they
Reprinted withpermission from ref144.Copyright2014Elsevier.
were produced by the SLM method. Then, their photo-
electrochemical water separation performance was investi-
gated. Due to high surface area need for efficient photo- To produce this geometry, an SLM machine (Realizer
electrochemical water separation, they prepared conical array SLM50)andTi 6Al 4Vmetalpowderwereusedfortheprinting
shaped geometry. In Figure 8, the production steps of the 3D process. This geometry was coated with polypyrene using the
printed electrodes from Ti powder can be seen. electrodeposition method, and it reached capacitance values
comparable to those of the other electrodes produced by the
lithography method. To obtain corrosion-resistant electrodes,
the SLM method has been widely studied. For example,
Kashapov et al.145 prepared electrodes using a 3D printer
(Realizer SLM 50 model) for cleaning the surfaces of metallic
products obtained with SLM technology. They used SS316
metalpowderwithaparticlesizeof20−40μmtomanufacture
Figure8.ProductionstepsofaTi-basedconicalelectrode.Reprinted the electrodes. In another example, Qin et al.146 conducted
withpermissionfromref142.Copyright2017JohnWileyandSons.
experiments to increase the corrosion resistance of electrodes
produced by the SLM method. Electrodes were fabricated by
To improve the surface area and light absorption in the SLM technique using Ti and Cu materials. The active
photoelectrochemical water separation, a conical shape was surfaceareaofthepreparedelectrodeswasdeterminedbyaCu
selected. They concluded that the irregularity of the conical wire and epoxy, and the electrochemical properties of the
surface structure caused by the AM process affected the electrodes were investigated. According to their results, it was
electrodeperformance.Aspolymericapplications,metal-based determined that the heat-treated samples were less likely to
structures were also studied comprehensively for HER and undergo pitting corrosion. In addition, it was stated that the
OER applications to produce pure hydrogen and oxygen in wasteofrawmaterialwasgreatlyreducedwhentheelectrodes
electrolysisprocesses.Forexample,Huangetal.143investigated were printed with the SLM method by comparison of
theproductionofelectrodeswithhighcatalyticactivityforthe traditional methods. Yang et al.147 produced a current
OER reaction by the SLM method. In addition, they used the collector, bipolar plate, gasket, and gas diffusion layer parts
SLM method to produce a cellular SS design with high for polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) water electrolysis
electrochemical surface area and mechanical properties and using the SLM method with a laser powder bed machine
were first to do so in the literature. The SLM technique was (Renishaw AM250). Produced samples can be seen in Figure
usedtooptimizeporesizeandelectrochemicalsurfaceareaby 10.
comparing the 3D electrode with commercial metal foam Figure 10a−c shows the image of the parallel flow channel,
structures. As a result of their studies, they stated that the 3D pin flow channel, and pin flow channel, respectively. The
electrodeproducedbytheSLMtechniquewasveryuseful,and imagesofAMbipolarplatesafterpolishingandcleaningcanbe
itmightbeusedtoproduceelectrodeswiththeSLMmethod, seeninFigure10d−f,andthesurfacesofAMplatesappearto
rapidly in different shapes. To obtain a staggered path for the be much smoother and better for assembling. The properties
gasflow,gasdiffusionequipmentmaybedesignedtomaximize of the interdigitated bipolar plates were investigated by
the active surface area within a predefined volume.110 In performing both ex situ and in situ experiments. At 80 °C,
another SLM study, Benedetti et al.110 designed an electrode forinsitutests,theyachievedexcellentperformanceat1.716V
to improve gas distribution to the active regions of a porous by 2 A/cm2. By designing a simpler PEM water electrolyzer
structure. This design is made of Ti material using Ti Al V cell and reducing the number of the electrolyzer parts, they
6 4
40645 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
Figure 10. Designed and produced parts for a PEM water
electrolyzers: (a) parallel flow channel, (b) pin flow channel, (c)
pinflowchannelwithLGDL,(d)AMplatewithparallelflowchannel
afterprintingandpolishing,(e)AMplatewithpinflowchannelafter
polishing, and (f) AM integrated plate with pin flow channel with
LGDL after polishing. Reprinted with permission from ref 147.
Copyright2018Elsevier.
decreasedthecontactresistance,whichwasveryimportantfor
the PEM water electrolyzers’ electrochemical performance. In
another study for PEM water electrolyzers, Ambrosi et al.148
investigatedtheproductionofallcomponentsforaPEMwater
electrolyzer by the AM method. These parts were prepared Figure 11. Production steps for 3D printed PEM water electrolyzer
components. Reproduced from ref 148. Copyright 2018 American
usingboththeSLMandFDMmethods.Theypreferredtouse
Chemical Society.
SSformetalpartsandtheFDMmethodwithPLAfilamentfor
the other parts. Moreover, they used the electrochemical
coating process to modify the electrode’s surface and
electrochemicalactivities.ThesepartscanbeseeninFigure11.
To increase the catalytic activity of the metallic electrodes,
theanodewascoatedwith Ni−Fedoublehydroxidefilms and
the cathode was coated with Ni−MoS . In situ tests of the
2
uncoated and coated electrodes were performed using the
linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) technique.
It was stated that all AM produced parts of the PEM
electrolyzer cell had high electrochemical performance. In
addition,Yangetal.149producedbipolarplatesusingtheSLM
technique with a Magics 20A Renishaw AM250 metal printer.
TheyconcludedthattheAMmethodmaybecapableofrapid
and low-cost prototype development for renewable hydrogen
production. Fuel cell and electrolyzer studies are very popular
in metallic AM due to its flexibility to produce gas diffusion
electrodes and bipolar plates. For example, scanning electron
microscope (SEM) images of metallic 3D printed bipolar
plates can be seen in Figure 12.
Figure 12. 3D printed bipolar plates produced by the SLM method
Figure 12a,b shows the SEM images of the flow channel and SEM images of the AM cathode bipolar plate before and after
before and after polishing, respectively. Before polishing, the polishing.(a)SEMimageoflandbeforepolishing.(b)SEMimageof
surfaceofthebipolarplatehasroughsurface,andmeltingpool land after polishing. (c) Image of 3D printed bipolar plate before
on the surface of the flow channel can be seen. Figure 13c,d polishing, and (d) image of 3D printed bipolar plate after polishing.
showsthesurfaceareaofthe3Dprintedcathodebipolarplates Reprinted withpermission from ref149.Copyright2017Elsevier.
beforeandafterpolishing,respectively.Thankstothepolishing
process, the surface of the bipolar plates is become smoother impingementsystem.SS316Lpowdersinthesizeof5−40μm
andmost of theexcess SSpowder is removed. As canbe seen wereusedintheSLMmethod.Duringtheprocess,thepowder
in Figure 12, polishing process is very important for the SLM bed was preheated to a temperature of 200 °C and kept in a
method after 3D printing of the energy conversion device purified argon environment until the oxygen level dropped
equipment’s. In another study, Laleh et al.150 studied the below 100 ppm before fabrication. These parameters were
production of high relative density SS316L specimens in a jet chosen as the preliminary trials to produce a high-density
40646 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
Table 4. Electrochemical Applications of Electrodes
Prepared by the SLM Method
powder afterprocess applicationfield ref
SS TiO coating photoelectrochemistry 141
2
SS electropolishing OERelectrode 143
titanium cleaning supercapacitor 144
titanium cleaning photoelectrochemistry 142
SS MoS−Ni,Ni/Fe electrolyzer 148
2
coating
SS Pt,Ni,IrO coating electrochemicalcell 139
2
titanium Ptcoating gasreactanttransport 110
SS IrO coating electrochemicalcell 140
2
titanium annealing rotatingplasma 152
electrode
SS heating plasmaelectrolyte 145
titanium− heating corrosiontestcell 146
copper
Figure 13. Working principle of the SLS method. Reprinted with atmosphere.154 Building materials may be selected from
permission fromref 155.Copyright2014Elsevier.
polymer, glass, ceramic, and polymer composites. An
illustration of the 3D printing method with the SLS method
material. The powder layers were scanned relatively in a is given in Figure 13.
meanderscanningstrategy byrotating 67°betweenthelayers. Inthismethod,partscanbeproducedwithaparticlesizeof
These results indicated that the SS316L specimens produced approximately200μm.156Atthesametime,theSLSmethodis
by SLM had higher hardness and lower corrosion resistance suitable for processing many different materials like 3D
compared to the commercially available electrodes. Moreover, printing process polymer−metal powders, ceramics, polycar-
in another corrosion resistant electrode study, Yang et al.151 bonate, nylon and nylon-glass composites, and hydroxyapa-
improved the corrosion resistance of electrodes produced by tite.157 This method is also highly preferred in the production
the SLM method. In their study, they used Al-12Si metal ofenergyconversionmaterials.Forexample,Alayavallietal.158
powder to produce electrodes with two different geometries. produced a graphite bipolar plate directly for methanol fuel
ThegeometriesproducedbytheSLMmethodwerecompared cells by the SLS method and used phenolic resin as a binder.
to conventional manufacturing techniques. They prepared Theydeterminedthattheporesofthetestedpartsunderliquid
electrodesforelectrochemicalmeasurementsusingcopperwire pressurewerecompletelyclosedandtherewasnoleakage.For
and epoxy to examine the electrochemical properties of the acidic environments, the bipolar layers should be both
specimens. According to electrochemical measurements and corrosion resistant and easily modified to any geometry.
weight loss analysis, electrodes produced by the SLM method Therefore, bipolar plates are produced using graphite, non-
with Al-12Si metal powder showed better corrosion resistance noble,orexpensivenoblemetals.Moreover,theircompatibility
thantheas-castAl-12SialloyinNaClaqueoussolution.Itwas with the channel design has an important place for the PEM
concluded that the difference of corrosion resistance between electrolyzer. It has been stated that bipolar plates consist of
Al-12Si alloys produced by different methods was due to the 23−48% of the total cost of the PEM electrolyzer.159
siliconparticlesizeinthemicrostructure.Itwasstatedthatthe Therefore, it is aimed to reduce the cost and material
parts produced by the SLM method had better mechanical consumption with new production methods such as 3D
properties and worse corrosion properties than the casted printing. For example, Guo et al.160 integrated the branching
parts.Inaddition,theproductionofelectrodesusingtheSLM structures of a tree leaf on bipolar plates. While designing the
methodwasseenasamongthepromisingmethodsinthefield bipolar plates, they used Murray’s law to define the optimum
of electrochemical applications. The electrodes manufactured configuration in biological circulation systems. According to
by the SLM technique for the electrochemical energy both numerical and experimental studies, they reported that
conversion systems are listed in Table 4. bioinspired interdigitated designs significantly improved fuel
As seen in Table 4, SLM electrodes are generally produced cellperformanceby20−25%comparedtotraditionalflowfield
with titanium and SS materials. The reason for this selection designs.InanotherenergyapplicationwiththeSLStechnique,
might be their high corrosion resistance and durability in Dobrzanś ki et al.161 prepared electrodes to use in silicon solar
alkaline and acidic environments. Several processes also cells. They investigated appropriate mixing ratios using
possible to apply produced electrodes for performance different mixture combinations and they used two different
improvements like coatings, surface treatments etc. Taking silver powders with different particle sizes to fabricate the
intoconsiderationfortheapplicationareasoftheelectrodes,it electrodes. According to their results, the silver powder could
is seen that the SLM electrodes appeal to a very wide range not be used in the preparation of the contact layer without
compared to other 3D printing methods.153 SiO due to many cracks in the silicon plates. As high
2
2.3.1.2. Selective Laser Sintering Method. Another temperature fuel cell, solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) are
important metallic 3D printing method is the SLS method. another promising application for the SLS 3D printed
In the SLS method, a high-energy laser beam is used for the electrodes.162Nielectrodesmaybesinteredonyttria-stabilized
sintering process. This laser sinters the powder material and zirconia (YSZ) material for lower contact resistance and high-
fuses it together. The printing bed is preheated to sufficient performance SOFC applications by optimizing laser scanning
temperaturebyfillingitwithinertgastocreateanon-oxidative speeds (200−6000 mm/s) and laser power (20−190 W).
40647 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
Figure 14.Schematic representation ofthe DLMD/PDEDmethod.
Table 5. Some Coatings for Metal-Based 3D Printed Electrodes
printingmethod printingmaterial method coatingmaterial applicationfield ref
SLM SS atomiclayerdeposition TiO photoelectrochemistry 141
2
SLM SS electrodeposition MoS−NiandNi/Fedoublehydroxide electrolyzers 148
2
SLM SS electrodeposition Pt,Ni,andIrO electrolyzers 139
2
SLM SS electrodeposition Ni flowcell 132
SLM titanium electrodeposition Pt gasreactanttransport 110
SLM SS electrodeposition IrO electrochemicalsystem 140
2
SLS graphite electrodeposition Ni DMFCelectrode 158
2.3.1.3. Direct Laser Metal Deposition Method. Another method can easily produce a heterogeneous material with
important metallic AM method is the DLMD method. In desiredpropertieswithsuccessiveandsimultaneousdeposition
DLMD method, or powder-directed energy deposition of different materials. Thanks to this method, contribution to
(PDED), account for three main parts: a 4 or 5 axis robotic the literature can be provided with different studies by
arm,apowderinjectionfeedstock,andafocusedlaserusedasa improving the product quality, shortening the manufacturing
heat source.124 Although the laser is commonly used, electron time, increasing the building volume, and material diversity.
beam, plasma, or electric arc can be also used as heat Apart from metals and their alloys, the DED method may be
sources.163,164 In Figure 14, the schematic illustration of the possible to direct ceramic processing for oxide and carbide-
DLMD method can be seen. based ceramics or high-temperature boride or nitride-based
In the DLMD/PDED method, raw powder materials are
ceramics.Itisalsoforeseenthatcoatingsorsmall-sizedspecial
injected from the stock system and are melted by the heat
cast ceramic structures may be prepared using the DED
source. Then, the molten material is deposited on the target
method for electrochemical energy conversion studies.
surface. After the deposited material solidifies, it is bonded to
2.3.1.4. Coating Applications for Metal-Based 3D Printed
thesubstratelayer-by-layer.165 Thismethodisahighlyflexible
Electrodes. In electrochemical applications, it is necessary to
3D printing method for the manufacturing of devices in the
improve the electrochemical properties and increase the
medical field or medium- and large-scale repairs.166 In this
corrosion resistance of the electrodes obtained by metal-
method, changing the thickness of the printed products by
based3Dprintingmethodsbecauseduringtheelectrochemical
adjusting the power values of the heat source or the powder
reactions, especially in OER, highly corrosive media has
flow rate are the main advantages.167 For example, Benarji et
contact with the electrode surface. For example, oxidation
al.168 investigated the corrosion behavior of electrodes
reactions occur on the anode side of PEM water electrolyzers
producedbythePDEDmethod.Theelectrodeswereprepared
and causes high overpotentials for the cells.170 To overcome
usingSS316metallicpowderwithaparticlesizeof45−105μm
this highly oxidative media, a coating process should be done
and were heat treated after sanding. It was observed that the
by high catalytic and corrosion resistance materials. The
electrodes produced by the PDED method had a lower
coatingsofthe3Dprintedelectrodespreparedbymetal-based
corrosion rate than the SS316 samples produced by conven-
powders are given in Table 5.
tional methods. In addition, it was stated that the decrease of
AccordingtoTable5,theSLMmethodisthemostcommon
theferritephaseoftheSS316electrodewiththeapplicationof
methodinthe3Dprintingprocess.Lowrawmaterialcostsand
the heat treatment temperature caused an increase in the
corrosion rate. Thus, as mentioned in this study PDED easy application to any geometry may be the reason for the
method may change the structure of the SS316 material. For widespread use of SS. In the literature, the electrodeposition
theDEDmethod,anotherapplicationwasconductedbyMelia method,whichisarelativelyeasiermethodcomparedtoother
et al.169 They investigated the effects of microstructure and methods, has been preferred for the coating process. Metals
machining processes on the SS304L electrode 3D printed by such as Ni, Pt, and Ti are selected as coating materials due to
the DED method. They used 45−90 μm powder to fabricate theirhighercatalyticactivityandcorrosionresistance.Asgiven
the electrodes and they stated that the corrosion resistance of inTable3,theapplicationfieldof3Dprintersandmetal-based
theelectrodesmightbeincreasedwithahighercoolingrate.As electrodes have a wide range in electrochemical energy
oneof themostusedtechniquesfor3Dprinting metals,DED conversion systems.
40648 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
Table 6. Comparison of the Positive/Negative Aspects of Other Materials Used in the 3D Printing Method and Their
Applications
materials applications positiveaspects negativeaspects ref
•SOFCsandSOECs •controlofporousstructures •limitedoptionofceramicsfor3Dprintingprocess
•automotiveandaerospaceindustry •easyprintingofcomplex •extremelyhighmeltingpointofceramics
anatomicalstructuresforhuman
bodyorgans
173,
ceramics •biomedical •reductioninproductiontime •dimensionalprecisionerrorsandlowsurface
174
quality
•providingbettercontroloverthe •sinteringorbondingprocessmayberequiredafter
microstructureandcomposition the3Dprintingofceramicmaterials
•noneedforanymolding
•automotivesector •easyprintingoflargeparts •highcost
•chemical •highaccuracy •poormechanicalstrength
epoxy-basedresin,
•healthandbiomedical(tissue,spine •verygoodsurfacequality •fragileparts 175,
photoresin,or
hydrogel surgery,neurosurgery,and •postprocessingsuchassanding, •lowpartlife 176
traumatology,etc.) andmillingisnotrequired
•noneedforanymolding
•automotiveandaerospacesectors •thermalstability •brittleness
•marine •chemicalandsolventresistance •poorimpactresistance
•energysector •environmentalstability •inhomogeneouspolymerarchitecture 177,
thermosetpolymers
•biomedical •mechanicalstrength 178
•lowcost
•fastproduction
•aerospace •lowdielectricconstant •itisnotwidelyusedin3Dprintingbecauseitis
•electronics •lowmoistureabsorption difficulttolinkphotopolymerizablegroupsto 179,
cyanateesters(CE) theirchains
•satellitecommunications •highthermostability 180
•insulationsandadhesives •excellentwateruptake
2.4. Other Materials and Their Electrochemical researchers are displayed great efforts to bring it to a higher
Applications.AM,whichiswidelyknownasthe3Dprinting technologylevel.183−185Forexample,Masciandaroetal.184and
technique, is used as a highly flexible technology that can be Xing et al.186 have produced 3D printed YSZ electrolyte self-
applied to conventional thermoplastics and thermosets, supports for utilization in SOFCs. They stated that the 3D
ceramics, carbons, epoxies, and cyanate esters, as well as a printingmethodisapromisingtechniquetoobtainelectrolyte
combination of other materials.171,172 In Table 6, comparison self-support in SOFC applications. In another study, Jia et
of the positive/negative aspects of other materials used in the al.187preparedthe3DprintedYSZelectrolytesupportsusedin
3D printing method and their applications is listed. monolithic SOFC stacks with the SLM method. They stated
Thermoplastics and thermosets come to the fore in the 3D that will have great potential for the development of SLA 3D
printing process, especially because they are accessible and printing processes of ceramic preparation in SOFC stacks and
common materials in FDM. However, material selection for 3D printing technology will contribute to the future
thermoplastics is mostly limited to PLA and ABS filaments. commercialization of SOFC stacks. Therefore, AM methods
Thermoset polymers (epoxy resin, polyester, melamine, urea, thatcanpreciselyutilizethiskindofmaterialstoproducefully
etc.) is a stronger polymer compared to thermoplastics and functional, low-cost, high-efficiency energy conversion and
theyaremoresuitabletohightemperatureandtoxicchemical storagedevicesareofgreatimportance.Itisnotedthatthe3D
environmentapplications becausetheymaintaintheirsizeand printing process has great potential in the production of
shape owing to the strong covalent bonds between polymer electrochemical energy conversion and storage devices
chains.181,182 Ceramic or concrete materials can be produced (electrodes, supercapacitors, etc.) compared to traditional
by3Dprintingmethodswithporesandwithoutanycracksvia production methods along with the use of environmentally
optimizationofparametersandadjustmentofgoodmechanical friendly materials. Moreover, chemically active materials like
properties.3Dprintedceramicproductshaveoccurredatrend catalysts are at the center of energy conversion applications.
totailormaterialswithahighstrength-to-weightratio,anditis For this reason, the selection of a suitable active functional
simplified the formation of complex ceramic lattices for many material is crucial to obtain high performance in the
applications.52However,comparedwithmetals,polymers,and electrochemical reactions. Carbon-based materials such as
othermaterials,ceramics-basedmaterialshaveoneofthemost graphene, graphene oxide (GO), carbon black (CB), carbon
critical challenges in AM method due to their extremely high fiber (CF), and carbon nanotube (CNT) are often used as
melting temperature. With the increasing interest to 3D catalysts, supports, and electrodes in energy conversion
printedcomponentsofSOFCsandSOECs,studiesfocusedon applications.188,189 These materials have extraordinary me-
3D printed high temperature electrochemical devices become chanical,chemical,electrical,andopticalproperties.Therefore,
populardue totheiradvantageous.Therefore, the3D printing carbon-based materials combined with AM technology have
process has a very important place to overcome these basic attractedsubstantialattentionfromtheresearchcommunityin
limitationsandreliabilityissuesofmanufacturingofSOFCsby energy storage and electrochemical energy conversion
enhancing their durability and specific power per unit volume applications like batteries, electrodes, supercapacitors, and
and mass. However, the use of the 3D printing process in catalyst support.190,191 Moreover, carbon materials with
SOFC manufacturing is still in development stage, and different conductive properties can be gained conductive
40649 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
propertiesindifferentways,andthesematerialscanbequickly Table 7. Different Shaped Electrodes Prepared by Various
obtained as energy materials using different types of 3D 3D Printing Methods
printingmethods.83,192,193Forexample,Bianetal.194produced
3D porous carbon anode electrode structures using the 3D
printingmethodtoimprovepowergenerationinmicrobialfuel
cells (MFC). Compared with 2D flat anode materials, they
stated that 3D porous carbon anode structures have a larger
surface area, good mass transfer, excellent biocompatibility,
and an increase in their electrochemical performance. More-
over, they commented that with the use of 3D printing
technology, the pore sizes of the 3D anode electrodes can be
adjusted by optimizing the surface area and mass transfers for
the best MFC performances. 3D printed porous carbon
materials are widely used for supercapacitors and battery
electrodes. Idrees et al.195 proposed a 3D printed porous
supercapacitor based on the use of activated carbon derived
from packaging waste. They concluded that the super-
capacitors made with the extrusion-based 3D printing method
have a capacitance of 328.95 mFcm−2 at 2.5 mA. They stated
that this high capacitance value is due to the porous carbon
used as the active material and the high loading of activated
carbon materials on the electrodes. Considering all these
circumstances, these materials based on 3D printing
technology and their applications will provide an opportunity
for further research on 3D printable materials in electro-
chemical energy conversion applications in the future.
3. DIFFERENTGEOMETRICSHAPESINTHEADDITIVE
MANUFACTURING PROCESSES FOR
ELECTROCHEMICAL ENERGY CONVERSION
APPLICATIONS
Contrary to popular belief, 3D printing methods offer a wide
opportunity for energy materials. Different geometric shapes
are obtained by combining the products produced by the 3D
printing method. It is possible to obtain parts, such as
electrodes and bipolar plates with 3D printing methods in the
energy field. The production stages of these products and
geometry structures are very interesting. These different
geometric shapes have common points in terms of both
production techniques and their application areas. The
geometric structures produced using different methods such
as SLS, SLM, FDM, SLA, DIW, and IJP should be compared.
InTable7,electrodesproducedusingthedifferent3Dprinting
methods can be seen.
As seen in Table 7, different geometries for several
applications have many advantages in terms of their
techniques. One of these advantages is the significant increase
in the surface area because of their geometric shapes. Today,
the geometric structures of classical electrodes, which are
preferredinmanyapplications,areinsufficienttodevelopthese
systems. To determine geometric shapes used in 3D printing
methods, the electrodes are named as interdigitated and
framework according to their structural properties and spatial
dimensions.203 For example, Arthur et al. stated that it would
notbeanappropriateapproachto3Dprintthickelectrodesfor
batteries to store more energy.207 Geometry designs with an
interdigitated structure are arranged mutually by interlacing.
These are located in such a way that the anode and the
cathode are positioned opposite to each other in the spatial ohmic losses decrease with the lower distance between the
plane.208 It was stated that these three-dimensionally inter- interdigitated and framework electrodes compared to other
locking structures minimize the ionic path length between the conventional electrodes. Long et al.210 examined the energy
electrodes in a thick cell.209 It was also concluded that the capacity and active surface area properties of electrodes in
40650 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
order to compare the advantages of 3D design interdigitated products but also reduce energy consumption required during
electrodeswith2Dparallelplateelectrodes.Accordingtotheir the production process. Moreover, the AM method has been
results,theystatedthattheelectrodeswithconventionalplanar accepted as one of the new generation solutions in the
battery configurations have a much lower ohmic resistance production novel electrodes in the fields of energy storage,
than conventional batteries. Bowen et al.211 used a similar energy conversion, and electrochemical applications. It is
geometrystructureintheirstudyandtheystatedthatthehigh difficult to produce flow channels, such as electrodes and
voltage obtained was due to the structure of the geometry in bipolar plates, which are utilized in energy applications with
the interdigitated electrodes. Furthermore, film-structured machiningmethodsduetoboththecostandcomplexityofthe
geometries can be 3D printed in a thin layer. The difference geometric structures. Therefore, the AM method has become
between these electrodes from conventional electrodes is a increasingly popular in terms of freedom of design, material
solid structure that can be designed in microstructures. In savings, and ease of generation of complex structures. A wide
addition, it is possible to add polymer or fibers during the variety of materials, from polymer materials to metals,
printing of 3D film electrodes. For example, since the ceramics, thermosets, resins, and esters, may be 3D printed
interdigitate has a greater height than the film structure, the using different methods, with rapid advances in AM
anode and cathode are always interdigitated in pairs in this technologies. However, there are not many studies on the
structure. It was determined that when using the larger height applicabilityofothermaterialsinelectrochemicalstudiesusing
interdigitate,moreporosityisprovidedbyincreasingtheactive the AM method owing to still in development. Therefore,
surface area of the electrodes.203 When the framework of the expanding the selection of materials for 3D printing of
electrodes was examined structurally, they had a porous electrochemical device components, as well as research and
structurelikeasieve.Thankstothisporousstructure,theyare development in electrochemical energy conversion applica-
frequentlyused inareas,suchmaterial loading.The geometric tions, are still topics to be explored. In addition, AM enables
designsoftheelectrodeshaveshownunlimitedvariability.For theuseofawidevarietyofprintablematerials,whichwillopen
example, Cheng et al.204 stated that the electrodes are subject new opportunities in the design and application areas of 3D
to shrinkage and structural damage during the fabrication. printing technologies. The 3D printed production of complex
They have performed electrodes with a self-supporting mesh geometries and electrodes for electrochemical applications
hemispheresurfacedesigntoavoiddegradation.Intheanalysis using the AM method will lead the way to electrochemical
measurements, they concluded that the radial array designs transformationindifferentgeometricshapesinthefuture.Asa
with a spherical surface have a higher capacity than the very important result, these geometric shapes may be formed
conventional solid-state batteries. In this way, they stated that as wearable flexible technologies that are compatible with not
the 3D printed electrodes are compatible with electronic only the human body, but also any animal body. Thanks to
devices,anditispossibletousecomplexstructuresbythehelp flexiblebiosensors,machinesthatinteractwithhumanlearning
ofa3Dprinting.Asaresultofthesestudies,theimportanceof communicationmaybeprovidedbyflexiblestructuresareable
charge transfer in electrochemical systems was emphasized, tobeproducedbyAMmethod.Theymaybealsousedinthe
and it was stated that a continuous conductive network development of wearable battery systems compatible with the
structureisneededforelectrontransferinelectrodes.212Thus, human body or systems that can facilitate the design phase of
AM technology provides structural integrity by improving the vehicleswithfuelcells.Therefore,inthefuture,theuseofthis
geometric structure designs and increasing the surface area in technology will increase in various areas including R&D level
electrochemicalenergyconversiondevices.Thepreparationof and industrial applications.
electrodes with different geometries using 3D printing ■
methods can contribute to decreasing ohmic losses and AUTHOR INFORMATION
improving their performance by increasing the amount of
Corresponding Author
catalyst loaded on the electrodes. Thanks to increasing
Mehmet Fatih Kaya − Engineering Faculty, Energy Systems
performance improvements have created the need to make
Engineering Department, Heat Engineering Division, Erciyes
compare the geometric designs of the electrodes prepared in
University,38039Kayseri,Turkey;ErciyesUniversityH2FC
3D. It is especially designed for use in electrochemical energy
Hydrogen Energy Research Group, 38039 Kayseri, Turkey;
storage devices such as supercapacitors and batteries. For
BATARYASANEnerjiveSan.Tic.Ltd.Şti,YıldırımBeyazıt
example, it is determined that conical array, microstructures,
Mah.,Ası̧kVeyselBul.,38039Kayseri,Turkey; orcid.org/
helicalshaped,basketshapeorsquareshapestructuresprovide
0000-0002-2444-0583; Email: kayamehmetfatih@
higher power and stability than traditional 2D electrode
erciyes.edu.tr
designs. In addition, in the future studies it is expected other
unique shaped designs will be prepared for electrochemical Authors
energy conversion devices by 3D printing technologies. Bulut Hüner − Engineering Faculty, Energy Systems
Engineering Department, Heat Engineering Division, Erciyes
4. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
University,38039Kayseri,Turkey;ErciyesUniversityH2FC
The production of complex parts or geometries, which are Hydrogen Energy Research Group, 38039 Kayseri, Turkey
difficult to produce with traditional manufacturing methods, Murat Kıstı − Engineering Faculty, Energy Systems
can be achieved using AM technologies without the need for Engineering Department, Heat Engineering Division, Erciyes
any mold or production line. As an emerging technology, the University,38039Kayseri,Turkey;ErciyesUniversityH2FC
AM method provides potential benefits in the electrode Hydrogen Energy Research Group, 38039 Kayseri, Turkey
manufacturing sector, and it recently paved the way for the Süleyman Uysal − Engineering Faculty, Energy Systems
development of novel designs in industrial applications. Engineering Department, Heat Engineering Division, Erciyes
Herein, we showed that AM technologies not only decrease University,38039Kayseri,Turkey;ErciyesUniversityH2FC
the waste materials used in the manufacturing stages of Hydrogen Energy Research Group, 38039 Kayseri, Turkey;
40651 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
BATARYASANEnerjiveSan.Tic.Ltd.Şti,YıldırımBeyazıt EBM Electron Beam Melting
Mah., Ası̧k Veysel Bul., 38039 Kayseri, Turkey FDM Fused Deposition Modeling
Il̇ayda Nur Uzgören − Engineering Faculty, Energy Systems GO Graphene Oxide
Engineering Department, Heat Engineering Division, Erciyes HER Hydrogen Evolution Reaction
University,38039Kayseri,Turkey;ErciyesUniversityH2FC LMD Laser Metal Deposition
Hydrogen Energy Research Group, 38039 Kayseri, Turkey LSV Linear Sweep Voltammetry
Emre Ö zdoğan − Engineering Faculty, Energy Systems LOM Laminated Object Fabrication
Engineering Department, Heat Engineering Division, Erciyes MFC Microbial Fuel Cell
University,38039Kayseri,Turkey;ErciyesUniversityH2FC MJM Multi-Jet modeling
Hydrogen Energy Research Group, 38039 Kayseri, Turkey; OER Oxygen Evolution Reaction
BATARYASANEnerjiveSan.Tic.Ltd.Şti,YıldırımBeyazıt PA Polyamide
Mah., Ası̧k Veysel Bul., 38039 Kayseri, Turkey PA11 Polyamide 11
Yakup Ogün Süzen − Engineering Faculty, Department of PA12 Polyamide 12
Mechanical Engineering, Erciyes University, 38039 Kayseri, PBBJ Powder Bed Binder Jetting
Turkey;ErciyesUniversityH2FCHydrogenEnergyResearch PBIH Powder Bed and Inkjet Head 3D printing
Group, 38039 Kayseri, Turkey PC Polycarbonate
Nesrin Demir − Engineering Faculty, Energy Systems PDED Powder Directed Energy Deposition
Engineering Department, Heat Engineering Division, Erciyes PE Polyethylene
University,38039Kayseri,Turkey;ErciyesUniversityH2FC PEM Polymer Electrolyte Membrane
Hydrogen Energy Research Group, 38039 Kayseri, Turkey; PEI Poly(ether imide)
orcid.org/0000-0001-8863-8911 PEEK Polyether Ether Ketone
PET Poly(ethylene terephthalate)
Complete contact information is available at:
PETG Poly(ethylene terephthalate)-Glycol
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
PLA Polylactic Acid
PP Plaster Based 3D Printing
Notes
PPy Polypropylene
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
PPS Polyphenylene Sulfide
■
PPSU Polyphenylsulfone
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
PS Polystyrene
Theauthorswouldliketogivethanksforthefinancialsupport PU Polyurethane
from the Scientific and Technological Research Council of SEM Scanning Electron Microscope
Turkey(TUBITAK)1001ResearchProjectsFundingProgram SLA Stereolithography
withprojectnumber120M234.Theauthorsalsowouldliketo SLM Selective Laser Melting
thank the Scientific Research Projects Unit of Erciyes SLS Selective Laser Sintering
University for funding and supporting the project under the SOECs Solid Oxide Electrolyzer Cells
contract numbers FDK-2020-10548 and FYL-2020-10547. SOFCs Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
Author B.H. thanks the Scientific and Technological Research STL Standard Triangle Language
Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) for their scholarships under SS Stainless Steel
the“2211-CPriorityAreasPh.D.ScholarshipProgram”(grant UV Ultraviolet
number 1649B032000098). S.U. thanks the Scientific and VP Vat Polymerization
Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) for
their scholarship under the “2210-C National Priority Areas ■
M.Sc. Scholarships Program” (grant number REFERENCES
1649B022006356).AuthorsB.H.andM.K.thanktheScientific
(1) Zhang, F.; Zhao, P.; Niu, M.; Maddy, J. The survey of key
and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK)
technologiesinhydrogenenergystorage.Int.J.HydrogenEnergy2016,
for their scholarships under the “2250 Graduate Scholarships 41(33),14535−14552.
Performance Program”. B.H. and M.K. also thank the Turkish (2)Solangi,K.;Islam,M.;Saidur,R.;Rahim,N.;Fayaz,H.Areview
̈
Higher Education Institution YOK for their 100/2000 Ph.D. onglobalsolarenergypolicy.Renewableandsustainableenergyreviews
Scholarship Program. 2011, 15(4), 2149−2163.
■ (3) Wiser, R.; Rand, J.; Seel, J.; Beiter, P.; Baker, E.; Lantz, E.;
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS Gilman, P. Expertelicitationsurveypredicts37% to49% declinesin
wind energycostsby 2050. NatureEnergy 2021, 6(5), 555−565.
ABS Acrylonitrile-Styrene-Butadiene (4) Toklu, E. Biomass energy potential and utilization in Turkey.
ALD Atomic Layer Deposition Renewable Energy 2017, 107, 235−244.
AM Additive Manufacturing (5)Zakhidov,R.CentralAsiancountriesenergysystemandroleof
BM Black Magic 3D renewable energy sources. Applied Solar Energy 2008, 44 (3), 218−
CAD Computer Aided Design 223.
(6)Maczulak,A.E.Renewableenergy:sourcesandmethods;Infobase
CB Carbon Black
Publishing, 2010.
CE Cyanate Ester
(7) Bechmann, F. Changing the future of additive manufacturing.
CF Carbon Fiber
Metal Powder Report2014, 69(3), 37−40.
CLIP Continuous Liquid Interface Production
(8) Reynders, C. 3D printers create a blueprint for future of
CNT Carbon Nanotube sustainabledesignandproduction.TheGuardian2014;https://www.
DLMD Direct Laser Metal Deposition theguardian.com/sustainable-business/3d-printing-blueprint-future-
DLP Digital Light Processing sustainable-design-production.
40652 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
(9)Verhoef,L.A.;Budde,B.W.;Chockalingam,C.;GarciaNodar, review.JournalofMaterialsEngineeringandPerformance2018,27(1),
B.; van Wijk, A. J.M. The effect of additive manufacturing on global 1−13.
energy demand: An assessment using a bottom-up approach. Energy (27) Salmi, M. Additive manufacturing processes in medical
Policy2018, 112,349−360. applications. Materials2021, 14(1),191.
(10) Azarniya, A.; Colera, X. G.; Mirzaali, M. J.; Sovizi, S.; (28) Sampson, K. L.; Deore, B.; Go, A.; Nayak, M. A.; Orth, A.;
Bartolomeu,F.;StWeglowski,M.;Wits, W.W.;Yap,C.Y.; Ahn,J.; Gallerneault, M.; Malenfant, P. R.; Paquet, C. Multimaterial vat
Miranda, G.; Silva, F. S.; Madaah Hosseini, H. R.; Ramakrishna, S.; polymerization additive manufacturing. ACS Applied Polymer
Zadpoor, A. A. Additive manufacturing of Ti-6Al-4V parts through Materials2021, 3 (9),4304−4324.
laser metal deposition (LMD): Process, microstructure, and (29) Schmidt, J.; Brigo, L.; Gandin, A.; Schwentenwein, M.;
mechanicalproperties.J. AlloysCompd. 2019, 804,163−191. Colombo, P.; Brusatin, G. Multiscale ceramic components from
(11)Raju,R.;Duraiselvam,M.;Petley,V.;Verma,S.;Rajendran,R. preceramic polymers by hybridization of vat polymerization-based
Microstructural and mechanical characterization of Ti6Al4V refur- technologies. AdditiveManufacturing 2019, 30, 100913.
bishedpartsobtainedbylasermetaldeposition.MaterialsScienceand (30) Appuhamillage, G. A.;Chartrain, N.; Meenakshisundaram, V.;
Engineering:A2015, 643,64−71. Feller, K. D.; Williams, C. B.; Long, T. E. 110th anniversary: Vat
(12)Liu,Z.;Wang,Y.;Wu,B.;Cui,C.;Guo,Y.;Yan,C.Acritical photopolymerization-based additive manufacturing: Current trends
review of fused deposition modeling 3D printing technology in and future directions in materials design. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2019,
manufacturingpolylacticacid parts.International Journalof Advanced 58(33),15109−15118.
ManufacturingTechnology 2019, 102 (9),2877−2889. (31)Li,J.;Pumera,M.3Dprintingoffunctionalmicrorobots.Chem.
(13) Popescu, D.; Zapciu, A.; Amza, C.; Baciu, F.; Marinescu, R. Soc. Rev.2021, 50(4),2794−2838.
FDMprocessparametersinfluenceoverthemechanicalpropertiesof (32) Mallick, M. M.; Franke, L.; Rösch, A. G.; Lemmer, U. Shape-
polymerspecimens:A review.Polym.Test. 2018, 69,157−166. versatile 3D thermoelectric generators by additive manufacturing.
(14) Dey, A.; Yodo, N. A systematic survey of FDM process ACS Energy Letters2021, 6 (1),85−91.
parameter optimization and their influence on part characteristics.
(33)Zhang,D.;Lim,W.Y.S.;Duran,S.S.F.;Loh,X.J.;Suwardi,A.
Journalof Manufacturing andMaterialsProcessing2019, 3 (3),64.
Additive Manufacturing of Thermoelectrics: Emerging Trends and
(15) Salentijn, G. I.; Oomen, P. E.; Grajewski, M.; Verpoorte, E. Outlook. ACS Energy Letters2022, 7, 720−735.
Fused deposition modeling 3D printing for (bio) analytical device
(34) Kodama, H. Automatic method for fabricating a three-
fabrication: procedures, materials, and applications. Analytical
dimensional plastic model with photo-hardening polymer. Review of
chemistry2017, 89(13),7053−7061.
scientific instruments1981, 52(11),1770−1773.
(16) Vaithilingam, J.; Prina, E.; Goodridge, R. D.; Hague, R. J.;
(35) Mekonnen, B. G.; Bright, G.; Walker, A. A study on state-of-
Edmondson, S.; Rose, F. R.; Christie, S. D. Surface chemistry of
the-arttechnologyoflaminatedobjectmanufacturing(LOM).CAD/
Ti6Al4V components fabricated using selective laser melting for
CAM, Robotics and Factories of the Future; Springer, 2016; pp 207−
biomedicalapplications.MaterialsScienceandEngineering:C2016,67,
216.
294−303.
(36) Park, J.; Tari, M. J.; Hahn, H. T. Characterization of the
(17) Sterling, A. J.; Torries, B.; Shamsaei, N.; Thompson, S. M.;
laminated object manufacturing (LOM) process. Rapid Prototyping
Seely,D. W.Fatigue behaviorandfailuremechanismsofdirectlaser
Journal 2000,6, 36−50.
depositedTi-6Al-4V. MaterialsScienceandEngineering:A2016, 655,
(37) Crump, S. S. Apparatus and method for creating three-
100−112.
dimensional objects.Google Patents: 1992
(18) Galarraga, H.; Lados, D. A.; Dehoff, R. R.; Kirka, M. M.;
(38) Yang, Y.; Chen, Z.; Song, X.; Zhu, B.; Hsiai, T.; Wu, P.-I;
Nandwana,P.Effectsofthemicrostructureandporosityonproperties
Xiong, R.; Shi, J.; Chen, Y.; Zhou, Q.; Shung, K. K. Three-
of Ti-6Al-4V ELI alloy fabricated by electron beam melting (EBM).
Dimensional Printing of High Dielectric Capacitor Using Projection
AdditiveManufacturing 2016, 10,47−57.
Based StereolithographyMethod. NanoEnergy 2016, 22,414−421.
(19) Zhu, F.; Macdonald, N. P.; Skommer, J.; Wlodkowic, D.
(39) Huang, Y.; Leu, M. C.; Mazumder, J.; Donmez, A. Additive
Biologicalimplicationsoflab-on-a-chipdevicesfabricatedusingmulti-
manufacturing: current state, future potential, gaps and needs, and
jetmodellingandstereolithographyprocesses.Bio-MEMSandMedical
recommendations. J. Manuf.Sci. Eng. 2015, 137(1), 014001.
MicrodevicesII;InternationalSocietyforOpticsandPhotonics,2015;
(40) Forster, A. M.; Forster, A. M. Materials testing standards for
Vol. 9518,p 951808.
additive manufacturing of polymer materials: state of the art and
(20)Kitsakis,K.;Moza,Z.;Iakovakis,V.;Mastorakis,N.;Kechagias,
standards applicability.NationalInstitute of StandardsandTechnology;
J. An investigation of dimensional accuracy of multi-jet modeling
Gaithersburg, MD,2015; https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8059.
parts. Proceedings of the International Conference in Applied
(41) Abbott, A.; Tandon, G.; Bradford, R.; Koerner, H.; Baur, J.
Mathematics, Computational Science and Engineering; Crete, Greece,
Process-structure-property effects on ABS bond strength in fused
2015.
(21) Cotteleer, M.; Joyce, J. 3D opportunity: Additive manufactur- filament fabrication. AdditiveManufacturing 2018, 19, 29−38.
(42)Park,S. J.;Lee,J.E.;Lee,H.B.; Park,J.;Lee,N.-K.;Son,Y.;
ing paths to performance, innovation, and growth. Deloitte Review
2014, 14,5−19. Park, S.-H. 3D printing of bio-based polycarbonate and its potential
(22) Farzadi, A.; Waran, V.; Solati-Hashjin, M.; Rahman, Z. A. A.; applications in ecofriendly indoor manufacturing. Additive Manufac-
Asadi, M.; Osman, N. A. A. Effect of layer printing delay on turing 2020, 31,100974.
mechanicalpropertiesanddimensionalaccuracyof3Dprintedporous (43) Matos, B. D. M.; Rocha, V.; da Silva, E. J.; Moro, F. H.;
prototypes in bone tissue engineering. Ceram. Int. 2015, 41 (7), Bottene,A.C.;Ribeiro,C.A.;dosSantosDias,D.;Antonio,S.G.;do
8320−8330. Amaral,A.C.;Cruz,S.A.;deOliveiraBarud,H.G.;SilvaBarud,H.d.
(23) Ziaee, M.; Crane, N. B. Binder jetting: A review of process, Evaluation of commercially available polylactic acid (PLA) filaments
materials,and methods. AdditiveManufacturing 2019, 28,781−801. for3Dprintingapplications.J.Therm.Anal.Calorim.2019,137(2),
(24)Li,X.;Liu,B.;Pei,B.;Chen,J.;Zhou,D.;Peng,J.;Zhang,X.; 555−562.
Jia, W.; Xu, T. Inkjet Bioprinting of Biomaterials. Chem. Rev. 2020, (44) Guo, R.; Stuebling, E.-M.; Beltran-Mejia, F.; Ulm, D.; Kleine-
120(19),10793−10833. Ostmann, T.; Ehrig, F.; Koch, M. 3D printed terahertz rectangular
(25) Angelopoulos, I.; Allenby, M. C.; Lim, M.; Zamorano, M. waveguides of polystyrene and TOPAS: a comparison. Journal of
Engineering inkjet bioprinting processes toward translational Infrared,Millimeter, and TerahertzWaves 2019, 40(1),1−4.
therapies.Biotechnologyandbioengineering 2020, 117(1), 272−284. (45) Houshyar, S.; Sathish Kumar, G.; Padhye, R.; Shanks, R. A.;
(26) Zhang, Y.; Wu, L.; Guo, X.; Kane, S.; Deng, Y.; Jung, Y.-G.; Bhattacharyya, A. Polyamide-nanodiamond filament. Mater. Lett.
Lee, J.-H.; Zhang, J. Additive manufacturing of metallic materials: a 2021, 285, 128992.
40653 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
(46)Larraza,I.;Vadillo,J.;Calvo-Correas,T.;Tejado,A.;Olza,S.; production scale multi jet fusion printing process. Additive
Peña-Rodríguez, C.; Arbelaiz, A.; Eceiza, A. Cellulose and Graphene Manufacturing 2018, 22,381−387.
BasedPolyurethaneNanocompositesforFDM3DPrinting:Filament (69) Redondo, E.; Muñoz, J.; Pumera, M. Green activation using
Properties andPrintability. Polymers2021, 13(5), 839. reducingagentsofcarbon-based3Dprintedelectrodes:Turninggood
(47)Haleem,A.;Javaid,M.Polyetheretherketone(PEEK)andits electrodes to great.Carbon 2021,175,413−419.
manufacturingofcustomised3Dprinteddentistrypartsusingadditive (70)BlackMagic3D.BlackMagic3DConductiveGrapheneComposite,
manufacturing. Clinical Epidemiology and Global Health 2019, 7 (4), 2022; https://3dcompare.com/materials/product/black-magic-3d-
654−660. conductive-graphene-composite-1-75-mm/ (accessed2022).
(48)Jiang,S.;Liao,G.;Xu,D.;Liu,F.;Li,W.;Cheng,Y.;Li,Z.;Xu, (71) Proto-Pasta. Proto-Pasta Composite PLA Electrically Conductive
G. Mechanical properties analysis of polyetherimide parts fabricated Filament, 2022; https://www.proto-pasta.com/pages/conductive-pla
by fused deposition modeling. High Perform. Polym. 2019, 31 (1), (accessed2022).
97−106.
(72) Filament, E. Electrifi Conductive PLA Filament, 2022; https://
(49)Hoskins, T.;Dearn,K.;Kukureka,S.Mechanical performance
www.multi3dllc.com/product/electrifi/ (accessed2022).
ofPEEKproducedbyadditivemanufacturing.Polym.Test.2018,70,
(73) Vernardou, D.; Vasilopoulos, K.; Kenanakis, G. 3D printed
511−519.
graphene-based electrodes with high electrochemical performance.
(50) de Leon, A. C.; Chen, Q.; Palaganas, N. B.; Palaganas, J. O.;
Appl. Phys.A: Mater. Sci.Process.2017, 123 (10),1−7.
Manapat, J.; Advincula, R. C. High performance polymer nano-
(74) Louloudakis, D.; Vernardou, D.; Spanakis, E.; Katsarakis, N.;
composites for additive manufacturing applications. React. Funct.
Koudoumas, E. Electrochemical properties of vanadium oxide
Polym.2016, 103, 141−155.
coatings grown by APCVD on glass substrates. Surf. Coat. Technol.
(51) Serrano, A.; Borreguero, A. M.; Garrido, I.; Rodríguez, J. F.;
2013, 230, 186−189.
Carmona,M.Theroleofmicrostructureonthemechanicalproperties
(75) Vernardou, D.; Louloudakis, D.; Spanakis, E.; Katsarakis, N.;
of polyurethane foams containing thermoregulating microcapsules.
Koudoumas, E. Electrochemical properties of vanadium oxide
Polym.Test. 2017,60, 274−282.
coatings grown by hydrothermal synthesis on FTO substrates. New
(52)Ngo,T.D.;Kashani,A.;Imbalzano,G.;Nguyen,K.T.;Hui,D.
J. Chem. 2014, 38(5), 1959−1964.
Additive manufacturing (3D printing): A review of materials,
(76) Ambrosi, A.; Pumera, M. 3D-printing technologies for
methods, applications and challenges. Composites Part B: Engineering
2018, 143,172−196. electrochemical applications. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2016, 45 (10), 2740−
(53) Rabe, M. 3D printing on textiles-new ways to textile surface 2755.
modification.54thMan-MadeFibersCongr.,Dornbirn,Austria,2015. (77) Lee, K. Y.; Ambrosi, A.; Pumera, M. 3D-Printed Metal
(54) Tsuji, H. Poly (lactic acid): synthesis, structures, properties, Electrodes for Heavy Metals Detection by Anodic Stripping
processing,and applications;Wiley, 2011. Voltammetry. Electroanalysis2017, 29(11),2444−2453.
(55) Ghalia, M. A.; Dahman, Y. Biodegradable poly (lactic acid)- (78) Kumar, K. A.; Ghosh, K.; Alduhaish, O.; Pumera, M. Metal-
based scaffolds: synthesis and biomedical applications. Journal of plated 3D-printed electrode for electrochemical detection of
PolymerResearch 2017, 24(5),74. carbohydrates.Electrochem. Commun.2020, 120, 106827.
(56)Swetham,T.;Reddy,K.M.M.;Huggi,A.;Kumar,M.ACritical (79)Rohaizad,N.;Mayorga-Martinez,C.C.;Novotny,́ F.;Webster,
Reviewonof3DPrintingMaterialsandDetailsofMaterialsusedin R.D.;Pumera,M.3D-PrintedAg/AgClPseudo-ReferenceElectrodes.
FDM.Int. J. Sci.Res. Sci.Eng. 2017, 3 (2),353−361. Electrochem. Commun.2019, 103, 104−108.
(57)Katz,S.Plastics:commonobjects,classicdesigns;withacollector’s (80)Bas,̧ F.;Kaya,M.F.3Dprintedanodeelectrodesformicrobial
guide; HarryN. Abrams: NewYork, 1984. electrolysis cells. Fuel 2022,317,123560.
(58) Coon, C.; Pretzel, B.; Lomax, T.; Strlic,̌ M. Preserving rapid (81)Foster,C.W.;Down,M.P.;Zhang,Y.;Ji,X.;Rowley-Neale,S.
prototypes:areview.Heritage Science2016, 4(1),1−16. J.;Smith,G.C.;Kelly,P.J.;Banks,C.E.3Dprintedgraphenebased
(59) Olivera, S.; Muralidhara, H.B.; Venkatesh,K.; Gopalakrishna, energystorage devices.Sci. Rep.2017, 7(1), 42233.
K.; Vivek, C. S. Plating on acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) (82)ManzanaresPalenzuela,C.L.;Novotny,́ F.;Krupicǩ a,P.;Sofer,
plastic:areview.J. Mater. Sci.2016, 51(8), 3657−3674. Z. k.; Pumera, M. 3D-Printed Graphene/Polylactic Acid Electrodes
(60) Ultimaker. Ultimaker Filament, 2022; https://ultimaker.com/ PromiseHighSensitivityinElectroanalysis.Anal.Chem.2018,90(9),
materials(accessed2022). 5753−5757.
(61)Teixeira,L.A.C.;Santini,M.C.SurfaceconditioningofABS (83) Zhang, J.; Yang, B.; Fu, F.; You, F.; Dong, X.; Dai, M.
for metallization without the use of chromium baths. Journal of
Resistivity and its anisotropy characterization of 3D-printed
materialsprocessingtechnology 2005, 170 (1−2),37−41.
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene copolymer (ABS)/carbon black(CB)
(62) Karahaliou, E. K.; Tarantili, P. Stability of ABS compounds
composites. Applied Sciences 2017, 7(1), 20.
subjected to repeated cycles of extrusion processing. Polym. Eng. Sci.
(84)Kwok,S.W.;Goh,K.H.H.;Tan,Z.D.;Tan,S.T.M.;Tjiu,W.
2009, 49(11),2269−2275.
W.; Soh, J. Y.; Ng, Z. J. G.; Chan, Y. Z.; Hui, H. K.; Goh, K. E. J.
(63) Dupaix, R. B.; Boyce, M. C. Finite strain behavior of poly
Electrically conductive filament for 3D-printed circuits and sensors.
(ethylene terephthalate)(PET) and poly (ethylene terephthalate)-
Applied MaterialsToday 2017, 9,167−175.
glycol(PETG). Polymer2005, 46(13),4827−4838.
(85)Gnanasekaran,K.;Heijmans,T.;VanBennekom,S.;Woldhuis,
(64)Maddah,H.A.Polypropyleneasapromisingplastic:Areview.
H.; Wijnia, S.; de With, G.; Friedrich, H. 3D printing of CNT-and
Am. J. Polym.Sci. 2016, 6(1), 1−11.
graphene-based conductive polymer nanocomposites by fused
(65) Dudek, P. FDM 3D printing technology in manufacturing
deposition modeling. Applied materialstoday 2017, 9, 21−28.
compositeelements.Archivesofmetallurgyandmaterials2013,58(4),
1415−1418. (86) Rymansaib, Z.; Iravani, P.; Emslie, E.; Medvidovic-́Kosanovic,́
M.; Sak-Bosnar, M.; Verdejo, R.; Marken, F. All-Polystyrene 3D-
(66)Mohamed,O.A.;Masood,S.H.;Bhowmik,J.L.Optimization
offuseddepositionmodelingprocessparameters:areviewofcurrent Printed Electrochemical Device with Embedded Carbon Nanofiber-
researchandfutureprospects.AdvancesinManufacturing2015,3(1), Graphite-PolystyreneCompositeConductor.Electroanalysis2016,28
42−53. (7), 1517−1523.
(67)Sood,A.K.;Ohdar,R.K.;Mahapatra,S.S.Parametricappraisal (87) Spinelli, G.; Kotsilkova, R.; Ivanov, E.; Petrova-Doycheva, I.;
ofmechanicalpropertyoffuseddepositionmodellingprocessedparts. Menseidov, D.; Georgiev, V.; Di Maio, R.; Silvestre, C. Effects of
Materials&Design2010, 31(1), 287−295. Filament Extrusion, 3D Printing and Hot-Pressing on Electrical and
(68)O’Connor,H.J.;Dickson,A.N.;Dowling,D.P.Evaluationof Tensile Properties of Poly (Lactic) Acid Composites Filled with
the mechanical performance of polymer parts fabricated using a Carbon Nanotubes andGraphene.Nanomaterials 2020, 10(1),35.
40654 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
(88) Mirzaee, M.; Noghanian, S.; Wiest, L.; Chang, I. Developing transitionmetalchalcogenideMoSxforhydrogenevolutionreaction.
Flexible3DPrintedAntennaUsingConductiveABSMaterials.IEEE Applied MaterialsToday 2020, 20,100654.
Xplore2015, DOI: 10.1109/APS.2015.7305043. (107) Kim, M. J.; Cruz, M. A.; Ye, S.; Gray, A. L.; Smith, G. L.;
(89)Foo,C.Y.;Lim,H.N.;Mahdi,M.A.;Wahid,M.H.;Huang,N. Lazarus, N.; Walker, C. J.; Sigmarsson, H. H.; Wiley, B. J. One-Step
M.Three-Dimensional PrintedElectrode andIts NovelApplications Electrodeposition of Copper on Conductive 3D Printed Objects.
inElectronic Devices.Sci. Rep.2018, 8 (1),7399. Additive Manufacturing 2019, 27,318−326.
(90) Phan, Q. T.; Poon, K. C.; Sato, H. A review on amorphous (108)Foo,C.Y.;Lim,H.N.;Mahdi,M.A.;Wahid,M.H.;Huang,
noble-metal-based electrocatalysts for fuel cells: Synthesis, character- N.M.Three-dimensionalprintedelectrodeanditsnovelapplications
ization, performance, and future perspective. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy inelectronic devices. Sci.Rep.2018, 8 (1),7399.
2021, 46,14190. (109) Choi, K.-H.; Ahn, D. B.; Lee, S.-Y. Current status and
(91) Bin Hamzah, H. H.; Keattch, O.; Covill, D.; Patel, B. A. The challenges in printed batteries: toward form factor-free, monolithic
EffectsofPrintingOrientationonTheElectrochemicalBehaviourof integratedpowersources.ACSEnergy Letters2018,3(1),220−236.
3D Printed Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS)/Carbon Black (110) Benedetti, T. M.; Nattestad, A.; Taylor, A. C.; Beirne, S.;
Electrodes.Sci.Rep. 2018,8 (1),9135. Wallace, G. G. 3D printed electrodes for improved gas reactant
(92) Browne, M. P.; Novotny,́ F.; Sofer, Z. k.; Pumera, M. 3D transport for electrochemical reactions. 3D Printing and Additive
Printed Graphene Electrodes Electrochemical Activation. ACS Appl. Manufacturing 2018, 5 (3),215−219.
Mater.Interfaces2018, 10(46),40294−40301. (111) Wauthle, R.; Vrancken, B.; Beynaerts, B.; Jorissen, K.;
(93) Joaõ , A. F.; Squissato, A. L.; Richter, E. M.; Muñoz, R. A. Schrooten, J.; Kruth, J.-P.; Van Humbeeck, J. Effects of build
Additive-manufactured sensors for biofuel analysis: copper determi- orientationandheattreatmentonthemicrostructureandmechanical
nation in bioethanol using a 3D-printed carbon black/polylactic propertiesofselectivelasermeltedTi6Al4Vlatticestructures.Additive
electrode.Anal.Bioanal. Chem. 2020, 412,2755. Manufacturing 2015, 5, 77−84.
(94)Kaya,M.F.;Demir,N.K.;Hüner,B.;Özcan,R.U.EffectofCu (112) Mower, T. M.; Long, M. J. Mechanical behavior of additive
Coating on The Physical and Electrochemical Properties of manufactured,powder-bedlaser-fusedmaterials.MaterialsScienceand
Conductive PLA Filament. International Journal of 3D Printing Engineering:A2016, 651, 198−213.
TechnologiesandDigital Industry2019, 3(2), 128−136. (113)Hong,D.;Chou,D.-T.;Velikokhatnyi,O.I.;Roy,A.;Lee,B.;
(95) Hüner, B.; Demir, N.; Kaya, M. F. Electrodeposition of NiCu Swink, I.; Issaev, I.; Kuhn, H. A.; Kumta, P. N. Binder-jetting 3D
bimetalon3Dprintedelectrodesforhydrogenevolutionreactionsin printingandalloydevelopmentofnewbiodegradableFe-Mn-Ca/Mg
alkalinemedia.Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2022, 47,12136. alloys. Acta biomaterialia2016, 45,375−386.
(96)Hüner, B.;Demir,N.;Kaya, M.F.Ni-Pt coatingongraphene (114) Bai, Y.; Williams, C. B. An exploration of binder jetting of
based 3D printed electrodes for hydrogen evolution reactions in copper. RapidPrototypingJournal 2015, 21,177.
alkalinemedia.Fuel 2023, 331, 125971. (115)Gussev,M.;Sridharan,N.;Norfolk,M.;Terrani,K.;Babu,S.
(97) Akshay Kumar, K. P.; Ghosh, K.; Alduhaish, O.; Pumera, M. Effect of post weld heat treatment on the 6061 aluminum alloy
Dip-coating of MXene and transition metal dichalcogenides on 3D- produced by ultrasonic additive manufacturing. MaterialsScienceand
printed nanocarbon electrodes for the hydrogen evolution reaction. Engineering:A2017, 684, 606−616.
Electrochem. Commun.2021, 122,106890. (116) Wolcott, P.; Hehr, A.; Pawlowski, C.; Dapino, M. Process
(98)Ng,S.;Zazpe,R.;Rodriguez-Pereira,J.;Michalicǩ a,J.;Macak, improvements and characterization of ultrasonic additive manufac-
J. M.; Pumera, M. Atomic layer deposition of photoelectrocatalytic turedstructures.JournalofMaterialsProcessingTechnology2016,233,
material on 3D-printed nanocarbon structures. Journal of Materials 44−52.
ChemistryA2021, 9(18),11405−11414. (117) Amorim, F. L.; Lohrengel, A.; Müller, N.; Schäfer, G.;
(99) Dos Santos, P. L.; Rowley-Neale, S. J.; Ferrari, A. G.-M.; Czelusniak, T. Performance of sinking EDM electrodes made by
Bonacin, J. A.; Banks, C. E. Ni-Fe(Oxy) Hydroxide Modified selective laser sintering technique. International Journal of Advanced
Graphene Additive Manufactured (3D-Printed) Electrochemical Manufacturing Technology 2013, 65(9−12),1423−1428.
Platforms as An Efficient Electrocatalyst for the Oxygen Evolution (118) Shashank, S.; Pinto, T.; Ramachandra, C.; Raghavendra, M.
Reaction.ChemElectroChem. 2019, 6(22),5633−5641. Optimization of EDM Electrode by Direct Metal Laser Sintering
(100)Bui,J.C.;Davis,J.T.;Esposito,D.V.3D-PrintedElectrodes (DMLS) method for SS316L Material. IOP Conference Series:
for Membraneless Water Electrolysis. Sustainable Energy & Fuels Materials Science and Engineering; IOP Publishing, 2021; Vol. 1013,
2020, 4,213−225. p 012002.
(101) Vanec̆ ǩ ová, E.; Bousǎ , M.; Sokolová, R.; Moreno-García, P.; (119) Sahu, A. K.; Mahapatra, S. S.; Chatterjee, S.; Thomas, J.
Broekmann, P.; Shestivska, V.; Rathousky,́ J.; Gál, M.; Sebechlebská, Optimization of surface roughness by MOORA method in EDM by
T.; Kolivosǩ a, V. Copper Electroplating of 3D Printed Composite electrode prepared via selective laser sintering process. Materials
Electrodes.J. Electroanal.Chem. 2020, 858, 113763. Today: Proceedings2018, 5 (9),19019−19026.
(102)Walters,J.;Ahmed,S.;TerreroRodriguez,I.;O’Neil,G.Trace (120) Kıstı, M.; Uysal, S.; Kaya, M. F. Development of Pt coated
AnalysisofHeavyMetals(Cd,Pb,Hg)Using3DPrintedGraphene/ SS316 mesh gas diffusion electrodes for a PEM water electrolyzer
PLACompositeElectrodes.Electroanalysis2020, 32(4), 859−866. anode. Fuel 2022, 324, 124775.
(103)Browne,M.P.;Pumera,M.ImpuritiesinGraphene/PLA3D- (121)Vinod,A.;Srinivasa,C.Studiesonlaser-sinteringofcopperby
Printing Filaments Dramatically Influence The Electrochemical directmetallasersinteringprocess.Proceedingsofthe5thInternational
Properties ofThe Devices. Chem. Commun.2019, 55,8374−8377. & 26th All India Manufacturing Technology, Design and Research
(104) Dijkshoorn, A.; Šcú lac, L.; Sanders, R.; Olthuis, W.; Conference (AIMTDR2014); December12−14,2014; pp 377−371.
Stramigioli, S.; Krijnen, G. 3D-Printing of a Lemon Battery via (122) Sutton, A. T.; Kriewall, C. S.; Leu, M. C.; Newkirk, J. W.
Fused Deposition Modelling and Electrodeposition. 2020 IEEE Powders for additive manufacturing processes: Characterization
International Conference on Flexible and Printable Sensors and Systems techniques and effects on part properties. Solid Freeform Fabrication
(FLEPS);IEEE,2020; pp1−4. 2016, 1, 1004−1030.
(105)Chen,P.;Shi,Y.;Zhang,L.;Li,J.;Zhu,X.;Fu,Q.;Liao,Q. (123) Chin, S. Y.; Dikshit, V.; Meera Priyadarshini, B.; Zhang, Y.
Performance of a Thermally Regenerative Battery with 3D-Printed Powder-Based 3DPrintingforthe Fabrication ofDevice with Micro
Cu/CCompositeElectrodes:EffectofElectrodePoreSize.Ind.Eng. and Mesoscale Features.Micromachines 2020, 11(7),658.
Chem. Res.2020, 59(49),21286−21293. (124) Ghosal, P.; Majumder, M. C.; Chattopadhyay, A. Study on
(106) Iffelsberger, C.; Ng, S.; Pumera, M. Catalyst coating of 3D direct laser metal deposition. Materials Today: Proceedings 2018, 5
printed structures via electrochemical deposition: Case of the (5), 12509−12518.
40655 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
(125)Gokuldoss,P.K.;Kolla,S.;Eckert,J.Additivemanufacturing (146)Qin,P.;Liu,Y.;Sercombe,T.B.;Li,Y.;Zhang,C.;Cao,C.;
processes: Selective laser melting, electron beam melting and binder Sun,H.;Zhang,L.-C.Improvedcorrosionresistanceonselectivelaser
jetting�Selectionguidelines. Materials2017, 10(6),672. meltingproducedTi-5Cualloyafterheattreatment.ACSBiomaterials
(126)Harun, W.;Kamariah,M.;Muhamad, N.;Ghani,S.; Ahmad, Science& Engineering2018, 4(7), 2633−2642.
F.; Mohamed, Z. A review of powder additive manufacturing (147) Yang, G.; Mo, J.; Kang, Z.; Dohrmann, Y.; List, F. A., III;
processes for metallic biomaterials. Powder Technol. 2018, 327, Green,J.B.,Jr;Babu,S.S.;Zhang,F.-Y.Fullyprintedandintegrated
128−151. electrolyzercellswithadditivemanufacturingforhigh-efficiencywater
(127) Ambrosi, A.; Shi, R. R. S.; Webster, R. D. 3D-printing for splitting. AppliedEnergy 2018, 215, 202−210.
electrolytic processes and electrochemical flow systems. Journal of (148) Ambrosi, A.; Pumera, M. Multimaterial 3D-Printed Water
MaterialsChemistryA2020, 8(42),21902−21929. Electrolyzer with Earth-Abundant Electrodeposited Catalysts. ACS
(128) Zäh, M. F.; Lutzmann, S. Modelling and simulation of Sustainable Chem. Eng. 2018,6 (12),16968−16975.
electronbeam melting.Production Engineering2010, 4 (1),15−23. (149) Yang, G.; Mo, J.; Kang, Z.; List, F. A., III; Green, J. B., Jr;
(129)Bhavar,V.;Kattire,P.;Patil,V.;Khot,S.;Gujar,K.;Singh,R. Babu,S.S.;Zhang,F.-Y.Additivemanufacturedbipolarplateforhigh-
A review on powder bed fusion technology of metal additive efficiency hydrogen production in proton exchange membrane
manufacturing.Additive manufacturinghandbook 2017, 251−253. electrolyzer cells. international journal of hydrogen energy 2017, 42
(130) Singh, A.; Kapil, S.; Das, M. A comprehensive review of the (21),14734−14740.
methodsand mechanismsforpowderfeedstock handlingindirected (150) Laleh, M.; Hughes, A. E.; Xu, W.; Gibson, I.; Tan, M. Y.
energydeposition.AdditiveManufacturing 2020, 35, 101388. Unexpected erosion-corrosion behaviour of 316L stainless steel
(131)Ramakrishnan,A.;Dinda,G.Directlasermetaldepositionof produced by selective lasermelting. Corros.Sci. 2019, 155,67−74.
Inconel738. MaterialsScienceandEngineering: A2019,740,1−13. (151)Yang,Y.;Chen,Y.;Zhang,J.;Gu,X.;Qin,P.;Dai,N.;Li,X.;
(132)Arenas,L.;PoncedeLeón,C.;Walsh,F.3D-Printed Porous Kruth, J.-P.; Zhang, L.-C. Improved corrosion behavior of ultrafine-
Electrodes for Advanced Electrochemical Flow Reactors: A Ni/ grained eutectic Al-12Si alloy produced by selective laser melting.
Stainless Steel Electrode and Its Mass Transport Characteristics. Materials& Design2018, 146,239−248.
Electrochem. Commun.2017, 77,133−137. (152)Liu,Y.;Zhao,X.-H.;Lai,Y.-j.;Wang,Q.-X.;Lei,L.-M.;Liang,
(133)Ibrahim,K.A.;Wu,B.;Brandon,N.P.Electricalconductivity S.-j. A brief introduction to the selective laser melting of Ti6Al4V
and porosity in stainless steel 316L scaffolds for electrochemical powdersbysupreme-speedplasmarotatingelectrodeprocess.Progress
devices fabricated using selective laser sintering. Materials & Design in NaturalScience:Materials International2020, 30(1), 94−99.
2016, 106,51−59. (153) Browne, M. P.; Dodwell, J.; Novotny, F.; Jasḱ aniec, S.;
(134)Brandt,M.Theroleoflasersinadditivemanufacturing.Laser Shearing, P. R.; Nicolosi, V.; Brett, D. J.; Pumera, M. Oxygen
additivemanufacturing 2017, 1−18. evolutioncatalystsunderprotonexchangemembraneconditionsina
(135)Jiao,L.;Chua,Z.Y.;Moon,S.K.;Song,J.;Bi,G.;Zheng,H. conventionalthreeelectrodecellvs.electrolyserdevice:acomparison
Femtosecond laser produced hydrophobic hierarchical structures on study and a 3D-printed electrolyser for academic labs. Journal of
additive manufacturingparts.Nanomaterials 2018, 8(8),601. MaterialsChemistry A2021,9 (14),9113−9123.
(136) Hwa, L. C.; Rajoo, S.; Noor, A. M.; Ahmad, N.; Uday, M. (154)Yap,C.Y.;Chua,C.K.;Dong,Z.L.;Liu,Z.H.;Zhang,D.Q.;
Recent advances in 3D printing of porous ceramics: A review. Curr. Loh,L.E.;Sing,S.L.Reviewofselectivelasermelting:Materialsand
Opin. SolidStateMater. Sci.2017, 21(6), 323−347. applications. Appliedphysicsreviews2015, 2 (4),041101.
(137) Nagarajan, B.; Hu, Z.; Song, X.; Zhai, W.; Wei, J. (155) Jaiganesh, V.; Christopher, A. A.; Mugilan, E. Manufacturing
Development of micro selective laser melting: The state of the art ofPMMAcamshaftbyrapidprototyping.ProcediaEngineering2014,
andfuture perspectives. Engineering2019, 5(4), 702−720. 97, 2127−2135.
(138) Sadowski, M.; Ladani, L.; Brindley, W.; Romano, J. (156) Kazmer, D. Three-dimensional printing of plastics. Applied
Optimizing quality of additively manufactured Inconel 718 using Plastics EngineeringHandbook; Elsevier, 2017;pp 617−634.
powder bed laser melting process. Additive Manufacturing 2016, 11, (157)Munir,K.;Li,Y.;Wen,C.Metallicscaffoldsmanufacturedby
60−70. selective laser melting for biomedical applications. Metallic Foam
(139) Ambrosi, A.; Pumera, M. Self-Contained Polymer/Metal 3D Bone;Elsevier, 2017; pp 1−23.
Printed Electrochemical Platform for Tailored Water Splitting. Adv. (158)Alayavalli,K.;Bourell,D.L.Fabricationofmodifiedgraphite
Funct.Mater.2018, 28(27),1700655. bipolar plates by indirect selective laser sintering (SLS) for direct
(140) Ambrosi, A.; Moo, J. G. S.; Pumera, M. Helical 3D-Printed methanol fuelcells. Rapid prototypingjournal 2010, 16, 268.
MetalElectrodesasCustom-Shaped3DPlatformforElectrochemical (159)Ayers,K.E.;Anderson,E.B.;Capuano,C.;Carter,B.;Dalton,
Devices. Adv.Funct.Mater. 2016,26(5), 698−703. L.; Hanlon, G.; Manco, J.; Niedzwiecki, M. Research advances
(141) Browne, M. P.; Plutnar, J.; Pourrahimi, A. M.; Sofer, Z.; towardslowcost,highefficiencyPEMelectrolysis.ECSTrans.2010,
Pumera,M.AtomicLayerDepositionasaGeneralMethodTurnsany 33(1), 3.
3D-Printed Electrode into a Desired Catalyst: Case Study in (160) Guo, N.; Leu, M. C.; Koylu, U. O. Bio-inspired flow field
Photoelectrochemisty.Adv. Energy Mater.2019, 9(26),1900994. designs for polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells. International
(142)Lee,C.Y.;Taylor,A.C.;Beirne,S.;Wallace,G.G.3D-Printed Journal of hydrogenenergy2014, 39(36),21185−21195.
ConicalArraysofTiO2ElectrodesforEnhancedPhotoelectrochem- (161) Dobrzanś ki, L.; Musztyfaga, M.; Drygała, A. Selective laser
icalWaterSplitting.Adv. Energy Mater.2017, 7(21),1701060. sinteringmethodofmanufacturingfrontelectrodeofsiliconsolarcell.
(143) Huang, X.; Chang, S.; Lee, W. S. V.; Ding, J.; Xue, J. M. Journal of Achievements in Materials and Manufacturing Engineering
Three-dimensional printed cellular stainless steel as a high-activity 2010, 42(1−2), 111−119.
catalyticelectrodeforoxygenevolution.JournalofMaterialsChemistry (162) Lomberg, M.; Boldrin, P.; Tariq, F.; Offer, G.; Wu, B.;
A2017, 5(34),18176−18182. Brandon, N. P. Additive manufacturing for solid oxide cell electrode
(144) Zhao, C.; Wang, C.; Gorkin, R., Iii; Beirne, S.; Shu, K.; fabrication. ECSTrans.2015, 68(1), 2119.
Wallace, G. G. Three Dimensional (3D) Printed Electrodes for (163) Dass, A.; Moridi, A. State of the art in directed energy
Interdigitated Supercapacitors. Electrochem. Commun. 2014, 41, 20− deposition:fromadditivemanufacturingtomaterialsdesign.Coatings
23. 2019, 9 (7),418.
(145) Kashapov, L.; Kashapov, N.; Kashapov, R.; Denisov, D. (164) Mazzarisi, M.; Campanelli, S. L.; Angelastro, A.; Dassisti, M.
Plasmaelectrolytictreatmentofproductsafterselectivelasermelting. Phenomenological modelling of direct laser metal deposition for
JournalofPhysics:ConferenceSeries;IOPPublishing,2016;Vol.669,p single tracks. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing
012029. Technology 2020, 111 (7),1955−1970.
40656 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
(165) Ahmed, N. Direct metal fabrication in rapid prototyping: A fuelcellresearchinthe3Dprintingprocesses.KHNES2021,32(1),
review.Journalof Manufacturing Processes 2019, 42,167−191. 11−40.
(166) Pinkerton, A. Laser direct metal deposition: theory and (186) Xing, B.; Cao, C.; Zhao, W.; Shen, M.; Wang, C.; Zhao, Z.
applications in manufacturing and maintenance. Advances in laser Dense 8 mol% yttria-stabilized zirconia electrolyte by DLP stereo-
materialsprocessing; Elsevier, 2010; pp461−491. lithography. Journal of the European Ceramic Society 2020, 40 (4),
(167)Kim, M.J.; Saldana,C.Thinwalldeposition ofIN625using 1418−1423.
directed energy deposition. Journal of Manufacturing Processes 2020, (187)Jia,K.;Zheng,L.;Liu,W.;Zhang,J.;Yu,F.;Meng,X.;Li,C.;
56,1366−1373. Sunarso, J.; Yang, N. A new and simple way to prepare monolithic
(168)Benarji,K.;RaviKumar,Y.;Jinoop,A.N.;Paul,C.P.;Bindra, solidoxidefuelcellstackbystereolithography3Dprintingtechnology
K. S. Effect of Heat-Treatment on the Microstructure, Mechanical using8mol%yttriastabilizedzirconiaphotocurableslurry.Journalof
Properties and Corrosion Behaviour of SS 316 Structures Built by the EuropeanCeramic Society2022, 42(10),4275−4285.
Laser Directed Energy Deposition Based Additive Manufacturing. (188) Guo, B.; Liang, G.; Yu, S.; Wang, Y.; Zhi, C.; Bai, J. 3D
Metalsand MaterialsInternational2021, 27(3), 488−499. printing of reduced graphene oxide aerogels for energy storage
(169)Melia,M.A.;Nguyen,H.-D.A.;Rodelas,J.M.;Schindelholz, devices: a paradigm from materials and technologies to applications.
E. J. Corrosion properties of 304L stainless steel made by directed Energy Storage Materials2021, 39,146−165.
energydepositionadditivemanufacturing.Corros.Sci.2019,152,20− (189) Zhou, H.; Yang, H.; Yao, S.; Jiang, L.; Sun, N.; Pang, H.
30. Synthesis of 3D printing materials and their electrochemical
(170) Kaya, M. F.; Demir, N.; Rees, N. V.; El-Kharouf, A. J.A. E. applications. Chin.Chem. Lett.2022, 33, 3681.
Improving PEM water electrolyser’s performance by magnetic field (190)Zhakeyev,A.;Wang,P.;Zhang,L.;Shu,W.;Wang,H.;Xuan,
application.Applied Energy 2020, 264,114721. J. Additive manufacturing: unlocking the evolution of energy
(171) Karakurt, I.; Lin, L. 3D printing technologies: techniques, materials. Advanced Science2017, 4(10),1700187.
materials,andpost-processing.CurrentOpinioninChemicalEngineer- (191)Zheng,Y.;Huang,X.;Chen,J.;Wu,K.;Wang,J.;Zhang,X.A
ing2020, 28,134−143. review of conductive carbon materials for 3D printing: Materials,
(172) Egorov, V.; Gulzar, U.; Zhang, Y.; Breen, S.; O’Dwyer, C. technologies, properties, and applications. Materials 2021, 14 (14),
Evolution of 3D printing methods and materials for electrochemical 3911.
energystorage. Adv.Mater.2020, 32(29),2000556. (192) Tian, X.; Liu, T.; Yang, C.; Wang, Q.; Li, D. Interface and
(173)Chen,Z.;Li,Z.;Li,J.;Liu,C.;Lao,C.;Fu,Y.;Liu,C.;Li,Y.; performance of 3D printed continuous carbon fiber reinforced PLA
Wang, P.; He, Y. 3D printing of ceramics: A review. Journal of the composites. Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing
EuropeanCeramic Society2019, 39(4),661−687. 2016, 88, 198−205.
(174)Zhang,F.;Li,Z.;Xu,M.;Wang,S.;Li,N.;Yang,J.Areviewof (193) Ning, F.; Cong, W.; Qiu, J.; Wei, J.; Wang, S. Additive
3D printed porous ceramics. Journal of the European Ceramic Society manufacturing of carbon fiber reinforced thermoplastic composites
2022, 42(8),3351−3373. usingfuseddepositionmodeling.CompositesPartB:Engineering2015,
(175) Bozkurt, Y.; Karayel, E. 3D printing technology; methods, 80, 369−378.
biomedical applications, future opportunities and trends. Journal of (194)Bian,B.;Shi,D.;Cai,X.;Hu,M.;Guo,Q.;Zhang,C.;Wang,
MaterialsResearch andTechnology 2021, 14,1430−1450. Q.;Sun,A.X.;Yang,J.3Dprintedporouscarbonanodeforenhanced
(176) Peerzada, M.; Abbasi, S.; Lau, K. T.; Hameed, N. Additive powergenerationinmicrobialfuelcell.NanoEnergy2018,44,174−
manufacturingofepoxyresins:Materials,methods,andlatesttrends. 180.
Ind.Eng. Chem. Res. 2020,59(14),6375−6390. (195)Idrees,M.;Ahmed,S.;Mohammed,Z.;Korivi,N.S.;Rangari,
(177) Wang, B.; Zhang, Z.; Pei, Z.; Qiu, J.; Wang, S. Current V. 3D printed supercapacitor using porous carbon derived from
progressonthe3Dprintingofthermosets.AdvancedCompositesand packaging waste.AdditiveManufacturing 2020, 36, 101525.
HybridMaterials2020, 3 (4),462−472. (196) Lee, C.-Y.; Zou, J.; Bullock, J.; Wallace, G. G. Emerging
(178)Wang,B.;Arias,K.F.;Zhang,Z.;Liu,Y.;Jiang,Z.;Sue,H.-J.; approachinsemiconductorphotocatalysis:Towards3Darchitectures
Currie-Gregg,N.;Bouslog,S.;Pei,Z.Z.;Wang,S.3Dprintingofin- for efficient solar fuels generation in semi-artificial photosynthetic
situ curing thermally insulated thermosets. Manufacturing Letters systems.JournalofPhotochemistryandPhotobiologyC:Photochemistry
2019, 21,1−6. Reviews 2019, 39,142−160.
(179)Zhou,Z.-X.;Li,Y.;Zhong,J.;Luo,Z.;Gong,C.-R.;Zheng,Y.- (197)Liu, J.; Guan,C.; Zhou,C.; Fan, Z.; Ke,Q.; Zhang, G.; Liu,
Q.; Peng, S.; Yu, L.-M.; Wu, L.; Xu, Y. High-performance cyanate C.; Wang, J. A flexible quasi-solid-state nickel-zinc battery with high
esterresinswithinterpenetrationnetworksfor3Dprinting.ACSAppl. energy and power densities based on 3D electrode design. Advanced
Mater.Interfaces2020, 12(34),38682−38689. materials 2016, 28(39),8732−8739.
(180)Chandrasekaran,S.;Duoss,E.B.;Worsley,M.A.;Lewicki,J. (198) Ding, J.; Shen, K.; Du, Z.; Li, B.; Yang, S. 3D-printed
P.3Dprintingofhighperformancecyanateesterthermosetpolymers. hierarchicalporousframeworksforsodiumstorage.ACSAppl.Mater.
Journalof MaterialsChemistryA2018, 6(3), 853−858. Interfaces 2017,9 (48),41871−41877.
(181)Bhadra,J.;Alkareem,A.;Al-Thani,N.Areviewofadvancesin (199) Yan, W.; Dong, C.; Xiang, Y.; Jiang, S.; Leber, A.; Loke, G.;
thepreparationandapplicationofpolyanilinebasedthermosetblends Xu,W.;Hou,C.; Zhou,S.;Chen, M.;Hu,R.;Shum,P.P.;Wei,L.;
andcomposites. Journalof Polymer Research 2020, 27(5),122. Jia, X.; Sorin, F.; Tao, X.; Tao, G. Thermally drawn advanced
(182)Mishra,S.;Katti,P.;Kumar,S.;Bose,S.Macroporousepoxy- functional fibers: New frontier of flexible electronics. Mater. Today
carbon fiber structures with a sacrificial 3D printed polymeric mesh 2020, 35, 168.
suppresses electromagnetic radiation. Chemical Engineering Journal (200)Vanec̆ ǩ ová,E.;Bousǎ ,M.;Lachmanová,Š.N.;Rathousky,́ J.;
2019, 357,384−394. Gál, M.; Sebechlebská, T.; Kolivosǩ a, V. 3D printed polylactic acid/
(183)Ferreira,V.J.;Wolff,D.;Hornés,A.;Morata,A.;Torrell,M.; carbonblackelectrodeswithnearlyidealelectrochemicalbehaviour.J.
Tarancón, A.; Corchero, C. 5 kW SOFC stack via 3D printing Electroanal. Chem. 2020, 857, 113745.
manufacturing: An evaluation of potential environmental benefits. (201)Silva,V.A.;Fernandes-Junior,W.S.;Rocha,D.P.;Stefano,J.
AppliedEnergy 2021, 291, 116803. S.; Munoz, R. A.; Bonacin, J. A.; Janegitz, B. C. 3D-printed reduced
(184)Masciandaro,S.;Torrell,M.;Leone,P.;Tarancón,A.Three- grapheneoxide/polylacticacidelectrodes:Anewprototypedplatform
dimensional printed yttria-stabilized zirconia self-supported electro- for sensing and biosensing applications. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2020,
lytes for solid oxide fuel cell applications. Journal of the European 170, 112684.
CeramicSociety2019, 39(1), 9−16. (202)Novotny,́ F.;Urbanová,V.;Plutnar,J.;Pumera,M.Preserving
(185)Masaud,Z.;Khan,M.Z.;Hussain,A.;Ishfaq,H.A.;Song,R.- fine structure details and dramatically enhancing electron transfer
H.;Lee,S.B.;Joh,D.W.;LIM,T.H.Recentactivitiesofsolidoxide ratesingraphene3D-printedelectrodesviathermalannealing:toward
40657 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
nitroaromaticexplosivessensing.ACSAppl.Mater.Interfaces2019,11
(38),35371−35375.
(203) Zhang, M.; Mei, H.; Chang, P.; Cheng, L. 3D printing of
structured electrodes for rechargeable batteries. Journal of Materials
ChemistryA2020, 8(21),10670−10694.
(204) Cheng, M.; Jiang, Y.; Yao, W.; Yuan, Y.; Deivanayagam, R.;
Foroozan,T.;Huang,Z.;Song,B.;Rojaee,R.;Shokuhfar,T.;Pan,Y.;
Lu, J.; Shahbazian-Yassar, R. Elevated-Temperature 3D Printing of
HybridSolid-StateElectrolyteforLi-IonBatteries.Adv.Mater.2018,
30(39),1800615.
(205)Chortos,A.;Hajiesmaili,E.;Morales,J.;Clarke,D.R.;Lewis,
J.A.3Dprintingofinterdigitateddielectricelastomeractuators.Adv.
Funct.Mater.2020, 30(1), 1907375.
(206)Zhang,Y.;Ji,T.;Hou,S.;Zhang,L.;Shi,Y.;Zhao,J.;Xu,X.
All-printedsolid-statesubstrate-versatileandhigh-performancemicro-
supercapacitorsforinsitufabricatedtransferableandwearableenergy
storage via multi-material 3D printing. J. Power Sources 2018, 403,
109−117.
(207) Arthur, T. S.; Bates, D. J.; Cirigliano, N.; Johnson, D. C.;
Malati,P.;Mosby,J.M.;Perre,E.;Rawls,M.T.;Prieto,A.L.;Dunn,
B.Three-dimensionalelectrodesandbatteryarchitectures.MRSBull.
2011, 36(7),523−531.
(208)Sheppard,N.F.;Tucker,R.C.;Wu,C.Electricalconductivity
measurements using microfabricated interdigitated electrodes. Anal.
Chem. 1993,65(9), 1199−1202.
(209)Roberts,M.;Johns,P.;Owen,J.;Brandell,D.;Edstrom,K.;El
Enany, G.; Guery, C.; Golodnitsky, D.; Lacey, M.; Lecoeur, C.;
Mazor, H.; Peled, E.; Perre, E.; Shaijumon, M. M.; Simon, P.;
Taberna, P.-L. 3D lithium-ion batteries from fundamentals to
fabrication. J. Mater.Chem. 2011, 21(27),9876−9890.
(210) Long, J. W.; Dunn, B.; Rolison, D. R.; White, H. S. Three-
dimensionalbatteryarchitectures.Chem.Rev.2004,104(10),4463−
4492.
(211) Bowen, C.; Nelson, L.; Stevens, R.; Cain, M.; Stewart, M.
Optimisation of interdigitated electrodes for piezoelectric actuators
and active fibre composites. Journal of Electroceramics 2006, 16 (4),
263−269.
(212) Sun, H.; Zhu, J.; Baumann, D.; Peng, L.; Xu, Y.; Shakir, I.;
Huang, Y.; Duan, X. Hierarchical 3D electrodes for electrochemical
energystorage. NatureReviews Materials2019,4 (1),45−60.
40658 https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c05096
ACSOmega2022,7,40638−40658