MaterialsToday:Proceedingsxxx(xxxx)xxx
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Materials Today: Proceedings
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/matpr
Review of composite materials and applications
Mahesh Bhonga, Tasneem K.H. Khanb, Kiran Devadea, B. Vijay Krishnac, Sreekanth Surad,
H.K. Eftikhaare, H. Pal Thethif, Nakul Guptag,*
aIndira College of Engineering and Management, Pune, India
bDepartment of Chemistry, (Science & Humanities Department) Anjuman College of Engineering and Technology, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India
cDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Institute of Aeronautical Engineering, Hyderabad, Telangana, India
dDepartment of Aeronautical Engineering, MLR Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, Telangana, India
eCollege of Engineering Technology, National University of Science and Technology, Dhi Qar, Iraq
fLovely Professional University, Phagwara, India
gDepartment of Civil Engineering, GLA University, Mathura, UP, India
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: This research seeks to discover and analyze the characteristics of composites that contribute to their performance
Carbon Fiber-Reinforced Composite (CFRC) improvement. Molding techniques are employed in a variety of industries to create composite products. Apart
Glass Reinforced Plastic (GRP) from their light weight and their high relative stiffness and strength, they have other advantages as well.
Ceramic Matrix Composite (CMC)
Fundamental concepts comprise the material and physical properties, in addition to their design, tooling repair,
Metal matrix composite (MMC)
inspection, and design. High-strength, lightweight materials helped to make helicopters, aircrafts, and rockets
Polymer Matrix Composite (PMC)
that were used for military purposes. It was evident that the components made of metal until that point were
superior in terms of mechanical performance however, their weight rendered their usage ineffective. Numerous
companies working in the polymer sector were expanding into new markets and expanding. The improved
mechanical properties of polymers could solve a number of problems, and this was the case when researchers
created a new light polymer in the laboratory. Composites are engineered materials made from two or more parts
that have a wide range of physical, chemical, as well as mechanical characteristics. The distinct features of the
individual parts and the arrangement of these components inside the structure lead to a myriad of distinct
characteristics in composites. Composites can be altered to meet a variety of mechanical, geometrical, structural
and chemical demands. Synthetic materials are utilized in various areas, such as construction (such as bridges
and structures) as well as the automotive industry (such as bodywork for automobiles) as well as aviation,
military (such as boats and ships) and even biology. Composites are fast becoming popular in the field of
medicine, despite the fact that polymeric, metallic, and ceramic biomaterials were used for a long time in
processes like tissue repair and replacement.
1. Introduction fields because it allows the development of biomaterials that, once
created and implanted in humans, can carry out their intended functions
Composite materials are used in many different fields, including without causing injury to the surrounding tissues or the body as a whole
construction (for things like buildings and bridges), the automotive in- [2]. The effectiveness with which biomaterials carry out their desig-
dustry (for things like car bodies), aeronautics (which requires materials nated tasks categorizes them into several groups. Due to their various
with the properties of high strength and low density), the production of benefits, composite biomaterials have found widespread application in
housing and industrial parts (for things like storage tanks, bathtubs, both in vitro and in vivo environments. These multiphase materials are
washing sinks, and shower stalls), and the medical field [1]. Materials easy to produce and can take on multiple forms and characteristics. By
scientists and engineers collaborate with biomedical engineers to better manipulating essential factors such as constituent volume ratios, fibre
people’s health, who apply engineering principles to medical biology. particle size, shape, orientation, distribution, matrix type, etc., desirable
Understanding human anatomy and physiology is essential for both material qualities can be accurately crafted. Compared to metals,
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: nakul030588@gmail.com (N. Gupta).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2023.10.026
Received 17 June 2023; Received in revised form 1 October 2023; Accepted 4 October 2023
2214-7853/Copyright©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.Selectionandpeer-reviewunderresponsibilityofthescientificcommitteeofthe14thInternational
ConferenceonMaterials,Processing&Characterization–ICMPC2023.
Pleasecitethisarticleas: MaheshBhongetal.,MaterialsToday: Proceedings,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2023.10.026M. Bhong et al. M a t e r i a l s T o d a y : P r o c e e dingsxxx(xxxx)xxx
polymers, and ceramics, composite biomaterials provide more leeway in materials,” as the Oxford English Dictionary defines it. Composites are
design and may be tailored to have almost any desired combination of materials in which the matrix and reinforcement have been combined to
properties. This study aims to introduce the concept of composite bio- produce improved qualities over the material used alone [8]. The final
materials, explore their potential as replacement and repair compo- composite can have varying properties depending on the method used to
nents, and present an overview of recent developments in this area. The cut, align, and place the reinforcement fibers. The addition of this pro-
benefits of metal, polymer, and ceramic biomaterials are compared [3]. tects the reinforcement from chemical and environmental hazards.
The need is the starting point for most inventions because it motivates so Metal matrix composites, or MMCs, have drawn a lot of interest
much of what we do. Initially, he was limited to using the rich natural lately because of their special qualities and extensive variety of uses.
resources surrounding him. Tools are wood and stone, while clothing is MMCs have been the subject of intense research to better understand
made from animal skins. Next, he discovered he could weave natural their synthesis, methods of processing, and mechanical characteristics
fibres like cotton and silk to create cloth. The technological revolution of [9]. Choosing the right kind, size, and quantity of reinforcement is
the previous two centuries has been primarily responsible for the essential for customizing the characteristics of metallic matrices. The
exponential growth in human knowledge. Wattle and daub, used for tribological characteristics of hybrid composites made of magnesium
wall construction for almost 6,000 years, is the first example of a com- and reinforced with graphite nanofiber (GNF) and alumina short fiber
posite material made and used by humans. This construction material (Al2O3sf) were the subject of one investigation [10–13]. The synthesis,
has been mainly superseded by concrete, a composite material made of characterization, healing evaluation, and mechanics of self-healing
cement and reinforcements like gravel (aggregates), sometimes known metal matrix composites (SHMMCs) reinforced with shape memory
as loose stones. Many millions of metric tonnes of concrete are produced alloy (SMA) were examined in a different study. Additionally, studies
worldwide each year. Concrete has a muscular compression strength but have looked into the application of laser additive manufacturing on
a relatively weak tensile strength due to its mechanical characteristics several MMC kinds. The design of the material, the interaction between
[4]. the metal matrix and reinforcement, the techniques of synthesis used in
Natural fibre composites are originated from the environment itself. the manufacturing process, and the resulting microstructures and
From the Egyptian and Indus Valley civilizations, clay reinforcement properties were the main topics of this study. The production and use of
was first utilized as a building material. They are biodegradable, easily MMCs have advanced, as demonstrated by recent studies [14]. These
available, low in cost and possess moderate strength in engineering, composites are appropriate for a range of product-based manufacturing
making artefacts etc [5]. Steel reinforcements are frequently added to processes due to their distinct mechanical, electrical, chemical, and
concrete during casting to increase strength and prevent it from failing thermal characteristics.
under tensile stress. Fibre-reinforced composites are another popular Construction (for example, buildings and bridges), the automobile
type (FRP). Carbon fibre-reinforced composites are very popular industry (for example, car bodies), aeronautics (which requires mate-
because of their lightweight and easy variation in mechanical proper- rials with the properties of high strength and low density), the
ties. Because of the intensive bond between Hydrogen and Vander Waal manufacturing of household and industrial components (for example,
forces, the carbon and reinforcement agent coalition become unbreak- storage tanks, bathtubs, washing sinks, and shower stalls), and the
able [6]. medical field are all areas where composites find practical applications
Most FRPs are either glass-reinforced plastic or carbon fiber- (for instance, as biomaterials for tissue engineering). The goal of the
reinforced composite (CFRC). Carbon and glass are utilized to make multidisciplinary discipline of biomaterials engineering is to improve
CFRC and GRP, respectively, in the form of fibers or inclusions. Epoxy medical diagnosis and treatment using engineered materials [10].
resin, a thermoplastic, is frequently employed as a binding or matrix Biomedical engineering uses engineering principles in medical biology,
material. Composite wood, mainly constructed of thin layers of hard- and materials science and engineering collaborate to improve human
wood boards bound together, is one of the many composites [5]. Others health. Understanding human anatomy and physiology is essential for
include ceramic matrix composites (CMC), metal matrix composites both fields since this knowledge is used to create biomaterials that, once
(MMC), polymer matrix composites (PMC), and composites (ACM). completed and implanted in humans, can carry out their intended
Traditional composites include those made with ceramic, metallic, and functions without causing any harm to the host organism. Different
polymeric matrices (ceramic matrix composites (CMC), metal matrix biomaterials are classified based on how efficiently they fulfill their
composites (MMC), and polymer matrix composites (PMC). Due to the designated tasks [11]. Composite biomaterials fall under this category
utilization of high-strength, low-density fibers, conventional composites and are increasingly used in both in vitro and in vivo applications. These
have superior strengths, stiffness, and elastic modulus to ACMs [6]. multiphase materials are simple to produce while allowing for novel
These materials stand out because of their ease of production and their shapes and properties. Changes in the volume ratios of ingredients, the
resistance to chemicals, heat, and creep. Synthetic materials, such as size, shape, orientation, and distribution of fiber particles, the kind of
plastics, have significantly advanced thanks to research in their creation. matrix, etc., can readily be made to get the desired material qualities.
Plastic can be made from various sources, including inorganic chem- Composites, unlike metals, polymers, and ceramics, can have nearly any
icals, biological matter, or synthetic chemicals. Synthetic organic plas- combination of properties by simply changing the constituent parts. This
tics, essentially polymers, are often referred to by this word. Polymers study aims to introduce readers to composite biomaterials, explain their
cannot be made without their constituent monomers. Most of each possible applications in replacement and repair components, and
monomer is composed of carbon and hydrogen atoms. Trace amounts of analyze the most recent developments in this study area. The benefits
other elements, such as oxygen, nitrogen, chlorine, and silicon, may also and drawbacks of metal, polymer, and ceramic biomaterials are dis-
be present. Polymers often take the shape of extremely long chains, cussed [12]. The reason for writing this review about composites and
which may be linear or branched at numerous locations. Carbon atoms their applications is to provide a complete review of the factors that
mix easily with other elements and with one another [7]. They create a drive the research and use of these fascinating materials. From their
solid anchor that can carry loads over considerable distances when high-strength and lightweight characteristics to their pliable designs
strung together. This review provides an overview of advanced fiber- with durability, versatility, and the ability to sustain themselves, com-
reinforced polymer (FRP) composite materials, including their posites continue attract engineers and researchers across the globe.
manufacturing techniques, properties, and applications. The authors Knowing this is a way to understand the constantly changing world of
discuss various types of fibers, matrices, and reinforcement architec- composite materials and their numerous applications, which contribute
tures, and highlight the key advancements in composite materials. to technological advances that define our contemporary world.
Composites are “two essentially different elements that, when mixed, Providing a thorough understanding of composite materials and their
generate a substance having properties that exceed the constituent uses is the aim of this paper. Its goal is to investigate the characteristics,
2M. Bhong et al. M a t e r i a l s T o d a y : P r o c e e dingsxxx(xxxx)xxx
benefits, and drawbacks of composite materials in a range of industries,
including construction, automotive, aerospace, and more. This review
will also look at the most recent developments in composite materials
and talk about how they might affect next technologies. Researchers will
have a better knowledge of composite materials’ use in contemporary
engineering and how they have shaped our world by the end of this
review.
2. Need for composites & benefits
Several advantages of composites can be seen when using metals and
wood. Composites’ real benefits are their lightweight, relative stiffness,
and strength. Lighter cars have quicker acceleration but get worse gas
mileage. Shots in golf, tennis, and archery benefit from lightweight
composites, increasing their accuracy [13]. A wind turbine’s efficiency
increases as its blades become smaller and lighter. Rubber wheels have
primarily replaced their wooden counterparts, and colorful nylon and
polyester have largely replaced cotton in women’s fashion. Lightweight
aluminum tennis rackets have replaced mainly their heavier wooden
predecessors, to name just a few instances. Despite their higher initial
cost due to their numerous desired qualities, composites are increasingly
being adopted in favor of more conventional materials [14]. Composite
materials are important because they can address challenges in in-
dustries around the world. These materials are an effective and afford-
able way to protect metal components against corrosive chemicals like Fig. 1. Materials used in boing787 Body [16].
acid rain and salt spray. Their lightweight and high strength properties
also contribute to fuel economy and reduce operational costs during lighter alternatives [17]. Besides being aerodynamic, these materials
transportation. They are therefore an environmentally friendly alter- must be simple to manufacture, stable even at high temperatures, and
native to traditional materials. It offers new opportunities in the corrosion-proof. Until a more sustainable option is created or discov-
biomedical industry for developing biomaterials which can replace or ered, composite materials have been used, are being used, and will
repair damaged tissues. They are adaptable, allowing for new design continue to be utilized to fulfill the material needs of such sectors. The
possibilities that don’t compromise performance or strength. This leads final qualities of a manufactured composite material are determined by
to an increase in efficiency and productivity across industries. the attributes of each of its constituents, as well as the quantity, shape,
For instance, carbon-fiber reinforced composites can be five times as and distribution of those attributes [18]. However, material engineers
strong as 1020-grade steel but weigh just one-fifth as much [15]. frequently engage in the latter. Mass fractions and volume fractions are
Carbon-fiber composites can be up to seven times as strong as 6061- two ways to describe the proportions of the various stages or compo-
grade aluminum and have a modulus that is twice as high. Metals, nents. Most composites consist of a matrix and an additional element,
polymers, ceramics, inorganic glasses, composites, and so on are all the inclusion or dispersion phase. The matrix is often a material with
examples of materials. Metals have a shorter lifespan when subjected to relatively high flexibility and moderate fracture strength. The shape and
high temperatures. In general, polymer-rich materials have the potential distribution of the latter stage significantly impact the ultimate char-
to function at much chillier temperatures. Despite their strength and acteristics of composite materials. The scattered phase’s geometry refers
thermal expansion capacity, ceramics and polymers are not very prac- to the particles’ sizes and shapes, whereas the distribution includes their
tical as structural materials since they become brittle at high tempera- positions and orientations within the matrix [19].
tures as shown in Fig. 1. In a general sense, composites can be Composite materials can be broken down into several categories
categorized as one of the following: thanks to their evolution over time and the work of many writers. There
Fiber Composites: The fibers support the stability of the straight are three main groups to which they can be assigned: There are two
shape. types of composites that use reinforcements: fiber-reinforced compos-
Particle Composites: Put differently, particles that serve to ites, which use inclusions with fiber-like properties, and particle-
strengthen matrices. When particles are randomly distributed in a ma- reinforced composites, which use inclusions with uniform axes [20].
trix, they support in a manner that is consistent in all directions. Con- Construction composites are a hybrid of modern composites and more
struction materials and synthetics must be excluded. conventional materials. Therefore, the primary distinction between the
Flake Composites: Flakes can only be strengthened in two di- first two categories is the particle geometry in the dispersed phase.
mensions due to their shape. It is common to find glass or mica in a Fiber-type particles, like natural fibers, have an irregular geometry but a
flake’s makeup. more excellent length-to-diameter ratio than particle-type particles,
Laminar Composites (layered): Two or more layers of the same or which tend to be spherical. Particle- and fiber-reinforced composites can
different materials make up a laminar composite. be separated into several groups depending on the matrix used. There
Combined Composites: Composites are made by blending different are three major categories of composites: those with a metal matrix,
substances. In addition, many composites can be fused to create a single those with a polymer matrix, and those with a ceramic matrix. Particle-
product. reinforced composites are strengthened by adding short particulates;
Composites play an unexpectedly significant role in driving inno- these composites can be categorized as large particles or dispersion-
vation in the electronics industry. These materials offer several advan- strengthened based on the average size of the reinforcements [21].
tages over others (metals, alloys, ceramics, and polymers), including the Large particles (those with a diameter of at least a millimeter) in the
ability to be produced with precisely controlled chemical, mechanical, former kind bear the brunt of the stress and help keep the matrix from
thermal, and physical properties. High mechanical strength and stiff- deforming where the two surfaces meet. These limitations are the pri-
ness, abrasion, and wear resistance, and so on are typically associated mary means by which large particle composites are strengthened. When
with heavy materials, but the aerospace industry is always looking for
3M. Bhong et al. M a t e r i a l s T o d a y : P r o c e e dingsxxx(xxxx)xxx
it comes to mechanical stress, the matrix bears the brunt of the weight in materials used in construction and manufacturing, the three leading
dispersion-strengthening composites despite including nanometer-sized composite biomaterials are particle-reinforced, fiber-reinforced, and
particles. This strengthening mechanism occurs at the atomic level, structural. As before, the performance characteristics of a composite
where scattered particles stop dislocation lines from spreading along the biomaterial are not always the same as those of its constituent pieces
matrix. When it comes to composite materials, this approach is by far the (matrix and inclusions) (matrix and inclusions). Evaluating the quality
most popular option [22]. The system consists of fibers made from of composites made from polymers (PMCs) is crucial, and non-
mechanically superior materials, such as those with high strength and destructive (NDE) methods play a key role in this evaluation. Ultra-
elasticity, embedded in a matrix made from a material like metal, sonic testing is a valuable tool as it can measure ultrasonic wave fre-
polymer, or ceramic. The power and stiffness of a composite are deter- quency and attenuation. This allows for the detection of imperfections
mined not only by its individual components’ characteristics but also by and damages in PMCs with varying fiber orientations. Monitoring the
the length-to-diameter ratio of the fibrous phase, which is an arbitrary hits to AE and the energy generated helps detect and classify various
but essential parameter [23]. emission signals during mechanical testing. This process, known as AE
Fiber-reinforced composites can be divided into three primary testing, allows for the assessment of the subsurface of PMCs and mea-
groups: continuous or long and aligned; discontinuous or short and sures heat loss during cooling or curing using infrared thermography
aligned; and intermittent and randomly oriented. How composites react and thermographic testing.
to tensile loads in terms of stress–strain relationships depends on the The cardiovascular system, also known as the circulatory system,
orientation of the load concerning the fiber’s longitudinal axis [24]. plays a crucial role in maintaining internal body temperature and other
Only composites with threads that run in a straight direction are affected vital functions [31]. The heart, the vascular system, and the blood make
by this. Fibers that are randomly orientated and continually oriented up the circulatory system, and it’s the blood’s job to carry oxygen and
display contrasting qualities. Stress and strain illustration, including nutrients around the body. With each heartbeat and blood flow through
threads, matrices, and composites. Failure strength (stiffness) in fiber the veins and capillaries, metabolic wastes are flushed away. Heart
materials is typically much higher than in the matrix. The failure strain conditions, both congenital and acquired, such as coronary artery dis-
is more significant even if the fiber is more brittle than the matrix. As a ease (CAD) and arrhythmias, may necessitate surgery for therapy. In
result, the failure strength and harmony of fiber-reinforced composites extreme situations of cardiovascular trauma, surgical intervention was
midway between the individual fibers and the matrix [25]. required to replace or repair damaged parts of the system. Cardiovas-
A structural composite is a collection of adequately made composites cular biomaterials include pacemakers and stents, two of the most well-
held together by a uniform adhesive solution. A structural composite’s known devices. Angioplasty is a surgical treatment that uses biomaterial
final qualities, such as mechanical and structural integrity, are defined stents to repair and prevent blockages in blood vessels and other bodily
by the compositions of its component ingredients and the geometry of its passages caused by disease or damage. These passages include the
designs, including the size and shapes of its more substantial building heart’s arteries, veins, pharynx, and digestive tract [32].
parts [26]. Sandwich panels and laminar composites are the two most Additionally, these polymers are used momentarily to maintain open
common structural composites. Stalking and gluing together two- channels during medical procedures. Traditional stent materials include
dimensional sheets with carefully chosen high-strength orientations stainless steel and other iron alloys, titanium and its alloys, magnesium
yields laminar composites. The individual sheets have such a large ratio and cobalt alloys, and plastics [33]. However, composite biomaterials,
of surface area to a thickness that the term “two-dimensional” is including metal and polymer matrix composites, are emerging to func-
invented to describe the result. These sheets are typically composite tion as superior alternatives. Due to their versatility in stent design, low
materials with aligned fiber reinforcement. Sandwich panels have a soft cost, biodegradability, and ease of production, composites are gaining
inside surrounded by a tough outside, making them different from popularity. After providing temporary vascular assistance, the body can
laminar composites [27]. There is a laminating agent that holds the two absorb newer composite stents. Because of their biocompatibility, ach-
parts together. The outside skins are fabricated from metals, laminar ieved by a design that considers how the stent material’s surface in-
composites (like plywood), and fiber-reinforced polymers that are all teracts with the surrounding biological tissues, these materials cause less
extremely strong and rigid. On the other hand, core materials are often irritation to the vascular tissue [34].
made from wood, honeycomb, or thermosets. One of the most crucial life-sustaining devices for the heart is the
As was previously indicated, the extensive range of composites with pacemaker, which biomedical engineers developed. When functioning
diverse combinations of attributes is made possible by their distinctive correctly, this tiny electrochemical mechanism regulates the heart’s
design and production freedom. So, unlike conventional materials like rhythms to guarantee enough blood pumping and circulation
steel, the values of composite characteristics are not fixed in advance throughout the body [35]. The four essential components of the pace-
[28]. However, the strength-to-weight ratio of most composites is rela- maker are the lithium-ion battery, the lead, the connector block, and the
tively poor. Their versatility has led to their incorporation into enclosure. A case containing the pulse generator, battery, and connect-
numerous fields, including medicine, transportation, and even space ing block is surgically implanted just beneath the skin of the head. After
travel. Composites are typically designed to surpass the performance of the lead’s conductive tip has been surgically inserted in the desired heart
alternative materials and fulfill a specific load requirement. This type of chamber, the information is connected to the connecting block via the
composite has several applications in the medical field. They are widely subclavian vein. While traditionally, metals like platinum alloy were
applied in the medical field, where they are used for everything from utilized for most of a pacemaker’s construction, in recent years, com-
diagnosing and treating injuries to working with biological materials. posites have been used due to their lower toxicity and lower environ-
When properly fabricated, composite biomaterials can be used to mental impact. Composites, being lighter, have taken the place of metal
replace or supplement organs that have been damaged due to traumatic shells in devices like pacemakers. A decrease in pacemaker-related skin
or pathological events [29]. The ability to design composite biomaterials reactions has been observed in the former because of the more excellent
with tailored physical, chemical, and mechanical properties for corrosion resistance of the former [36].
specialized applications is a significant factor in their widespread Our incisors, canines, premolars, and molars work together to break
adoption in modern medical practice. Although biomedical engineering down food into smaller pieces that are easier to swallow. The four canine
has historically used both natural and synthetic biomaterials, the advent teeth adjacent to the incisors tear food apart, while the premolars and
of composites has profoundly altered the field. Constant improvements molars accomplish the crushing. Use the eight front teeth, or incisors, for
in these materials and the groundbreaking design of further enhanced cutting. The human dental system is crucial for speech and other sound
medical devices have increased survival rates for accidents and diseases, production. The dental plan is susceptible to abnormalities and damage
as well as the quality of life and life expectancy [30]. Like the composite from sickness, trauma, and congenital conditions, much like any other
4M. Bhong et al. M a t e r i a l s T o d a y : P r o c e e dingsxxx(xxxx)xxx
body part. Genetic defects can also explain tooth loss or other dental composite biomaterial of polylactic acid and hyaluronic acid ester.
abnormalities. The two most common dental illnesses are plaque and Damaged ligaments can mend on their own because of the reduced wear
caries (commonly known as tooth decay). In the former, a biofilm is built of this prosthesis. The behavior of ethylene-butene copolymer compos-
by bacteria. Due to a lack of oxygen, these bacteria make lactic acid, ites with ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) rein-
which dissolves phosphate and calcium from enamel, making it weak forcement under cyclic loading was investigated, and it was discovered
and susceptible to infection. Microorganisms like this love the food that, with the right copolymer type and angle combination, these com-
scraps that get stuck between and around people’s teeth after a meal. posites could be made into exceptionally fatigue-resistant biomedical
Depletion of bone-building minerals like calcium and phosphorus can applications. As time went on, researchers found that this fatigue-
lead to tooth decay and eventual loss. In contrast, the prevalence of resistant material could be used to create a ligament prosthetic.
cavities in youngsters may be traced back to the food consumed [37]. Despite evidence from animal studies suggesting that PET-reinforced
Traumatic tooth damage might compromise the tooth’s structural PHEMA cartilage prostheses cause synovitis, they are being used. A
integrity or make it more susceptible to infection. Since the turn of the high-strength composite material, made by fusing terephthalate poly-
century, head traumas have become increasingly common due to acci- ester fiber with a collagen matrix, has been created to combat this issue.
dents and acts of violence, which can devastate a person’s oral health. It After six months of in vivo testing, this material did not negatively
has become common practice to employ composite biomaterials such as interact with the host tissue. Still, it did not promote the growth and
polymer matrix composites for dental implants to restore lost teeth for penetration of fibrous tissues between the prosthesis and the host bones.
both functional and aesthetic purposes. These alternatives are more A joint is the meeting place of two or more bones in the body. These
biocompatible than conventional metallic dental biomaterials like silver connective tissues allow for mobility and support the entire body. The
amalgam. While aluminized silver-mercury fillings are incredibly human body has about 300 joints, most of which see regular use. Un-
harmful, acrylic resins lack the stiffness and mechanical strength fortunately, dislocations, fractures, and other forms of joint injury are
necessary to serve as prosthetic posterior teeth. Lifting the flap and typical results. Extreme cases of arthritis or trauma may necessitate joint
exposing the bone can replace a missing or broken tooth. First, a pilot replacement surgery, but in many cases, the joint can be brought back to
hole is drilled into the bone to secure the screw, holding the bone piece health using therapeutic methods. After surgically exposing the heads of
in place. As a last step, the prosthetic tooth’s abutment is screwed into the prosthetic femur and tibia, the stems are drilled into the patient’s
place. natural femur and tibia. Together, these components provide movement
The most common options are permanent (such as bridges) and that is analogous to that of a natural knee.
removable dental prostheses. Denture wearers should limit their use of There are a lot of similarities between the functions of the knee and
removable dental prostheses because they can cause discomfort after the hip joint. Hip replacement surgery is an option for patients who have
prolonged use. These items are often fabricated using corrosion-resistant experienced severe damage to their hip joints. Metals, polymers, ce-
polycarbonates reinforced with glass fibers. Ultra-high molecular weight ramics, and composites are frequently used in constructing these
polyethylene is commonly used in the construction of fixed bridges. biomedical instruments [38]. An acetabular cup or shell is implanted
Methacrylic matrix composites reinforced with fiber and inorganic into the pelvis using a fixation agent, and a stem leading to the ball is
particles have been discovered to possess improved mechanical and placed into the femur. Alloyed metals or metallic composites are typi-
aesthetic qualities compared to the typical polymer matrix composites cally utilized for the branch because of the material’s excellent strength
used in dentistry. Dental materials containing titanium-hydroxyapatite in tension and compression. Compared to ceramic biomaterials, com-
are also gaining attention. Because of its bioactive compatibility with posite metals have significantly higher resilience to wear. Consequently,
the surrounding tissues, hydroxyapatite is chosen for the lower part of they are now employed to construct the ball.
the implant, and titanium is used for the upper section due to its Treatment of bone fractures with composites is successful. Again,
incredible mechanical strength. this is because bones have a unique makeup that is tailored to their
Cartilage is a flexible and elastic kind of bone that can be found in the specific function. The superior performance of these materials dramat-
ears, nose, ribs, and joints. As an adult, it helps keep the skeleton in ically aids bone growth and healing. Thus, compatibility is just the
place. This material makes up the majority of the structure in newborns, beginning. The composites utilized as a framework are biodegradable,
giving place to the more rigid bone formations later on. Polymeric so they remain even after their intended purpose has been fulfilled.
composites such as poly [2–hydroxyethylmethacrylate] (PHEMA) com- Composites may also be used for internal fastening mechanisms. In the
bined with polyethylene terephthalate (PET) synthetic fibers can be past, they were made of metal. Metal mechanical aids are incredibly
utilized to replace cartilage that is either absent at birth or destroyed long-lasting but can deteriorate quickly and are stiffer than bone, which
during development, trauma, or other causes. It is possible to mimic the can be painful [39]. One practical answer to these problems is polymer
properties of natural cartilage by modifying the volumes of the two composites. Carbon fiber-based polymers could be used to make a device
components of this biomaterial. Composite biomaterials, including to support the healing bone because of their high strength and elastic
ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene and hyaluronic acid, are also qualities, similar to those of natural bone. Due to the nature of the
used as cartilage substitutes. High durability makes this a common material, there is no risk of corrosion. The biodegradable matrices used
choice for replacing damaged joint cartilage, spinal fibrocartilage, or to construct the implant can break down while the bone heals, releasing
menisci. Wear and exhaustion from repeated stress are significant causes any necessary drugs.
of artificial cartilage failure. We have made steady progress toward Bone cement helps repair broken bones, and prosthetic joints are
finding answers to these problems. Injectable hydrogels, a polymeric easily implanted. When used, it achieves the same results as regular
biomaterial, are occasionally used with composite biomaterials to cement. It is a thick, moist material used to seal the area where natural
reduce wear and expedite healing. bone meets metal or plastic implants. After the adhesive cures, it fills any
Ligaments are the fibrous fibers that connect bones and cartilage. spaces between the parts and binds them together securely. The poly-
Many athletes have injuries to the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL). merization process creates a bond between the two substances that is
Repairing or replacing this tissue with polymeric and composite bio- very stable. Long-lasting casts can be made using fiberglass, polyester
materials helps arthritic or damaged joints usually function. Similarly, fabrics, and a polyurethane matrix rather than traditional cotton and
to artificial cartilage, artificial ligaments wear out and eventually break plaster [40]. Models made from composite materials are more robust,
down due to repeated tension and wear. The inclusions are not durable weatherproof, and amenable to creating high-quality X-ray scans.
since they are easily worn down, have poor flexural and torsional Despite being more challenging to eliminate, their benefits outweigh the
strength, and can cause synovial membrane inflammation. For use as a drawbacks. In recent years, a new method that can be used as an
ligament tissue substitute, researchers have created a biodegradable alternative to the conventional one has emerged: 3-D printed composite
5M. Bhong et al. M a t e r i a l s T o d a y : P r o c e e dingsxxx(xxxx)xxx
castings. Their web-like shape increases ventilation while delivering all manufacturing techniques including 3D printing and automated layup
the benefits of a regular mixed cast. They also allow the development of procedures. By making transportation vehicles lighter and improving
patient-specific ergonomic solutions that boost health and well-being. If the efficiency of renewable energy sources, composite materials help to
3-D printing’s speed and quality improvements continue, it may replace reduce energy consumption. Composites are useful for applications in
conventional manufacturing methods. Composite materials have been electronics, telecommunications, and radar systems because they may
the basis of cutting-edge designs for external prostheses. Composites be manufactured to have particular electromagnetic properties.
have supplanted wood, metal, and leather. Composites are preferred
since they keep the best features of the materials they’re made of while 3. Fabrication methods
also adding their benefits.
In contemporary engineering and manufacturing, the effect of com- With such rapid development in such a short period, it’s hard to
posite materials on sophisticated production processes is a crucial sub- believe composites are only a few decades old. While ceramics show
ject. Because of their special qualities, composite materials—which are promise for structural applications, there are still challenges to be
made up of a variety of components with specific properties—have overcome. Price competition causes significant shifts in the composites
transformed a number of industries. With the use of pertinent data and market [41]. Molding procedures are used to create many different
references, we will discuss the important influence that composite ma- composite goods. The many techniques of shaping include as shown in
terials have on advanced manufacturing processes in this section. Fig. 2.
Because of their excellent strength-to-weight ratio, composites are a Some manufacturing processes include casting, centrifugal casting,
great choice for industries like aerospace and automotive where continuous casting, slip forming, press molding, transfer molding, pul-
reducing weight is crucial. Composite materials have great strength and trusion molding, and filament winding. In addition to the methods
durability, which makes them ideal for longer-lasting and more already mentioned, other methods include thermoplastic molding,
dependable products in a variety of industries, such as construction and vacuum infusion, wet lay-up, compression molding, and computer nu-
maritime. Because composites are naturally resistant to corrosion, they merical control (CNC) filament winding.
can be used in severe settings and applications where traditional ma- A “formulator” can be any business that combines raw materials,
terials might eventually degrade. The mechanical properties of com- semi-finished products, or finished goods to create a new product. It is
posites can be precisely tailored by engineers using advanced necessary to blend, mix, or otherwise shape elements of natural or
manufacturing processes, enabling the design of materials with specified synthetic origin that are usually incompatible. The word “formulation”
qualities for a wide range of applications. Composites can be combined is used to characterize this method. There can be no therapeutic benefit
with other materials to create unique patterns and multipurpose com- from a drug without the presence of its active components. Paints,
ponents by molding them into intricate shapes. Composite production cosmetic creams, mayonnaise, and composite materials are made using a
has become more economical and effective thanks to advanced light dispersion of numerous immiscible phases that seem homogeneous
Fig. 2. Fabrication Method [42].
6M. Bhong et al. M a t e r i a l s T o d a y : P r o c e e dingsxxx(xxxx)xxx
on the macroscopic size but are heterogeneous on the microscopic scale to-weight ratio [43]. Reduced stiffness and fatigue; increased toughness.
[42]. The success of the entire section hinges on the method of mixing Superior resistance to corrosion and excellent utility. Protection from
and the durability of the resulting mixture. Some composite materials electricity, fire, and the elements. Ease of fabrication or familiarity with
take the most outstanding qualities of different substances and combine a range of fabrication procedures. Longer longevity and lower expen-
them into one. Matrix-embedded composites are now often classified ditures. For many industries, composites are invaluable, as shown in
based on the configurations of their reinforcements (also known as Fig. 3.
fillers). The matrix helps to maintain order and consistency in loads. The
composite may transfer some of the load’s stresses to itself. Substances 4.1. Use of composites in aerospace structure
having a history of inconsistency and even anisotropy are the result.
Many variables, such as matrix and charge type, charge shape and Composites are frequently used to construct various aircraft acces-
amount, charge concentration, interface quality, and manufacturing sories, including doors, ring tips, ducts, fairings, random, and dielectric
process, can impact the final product quality of a composite. panels. In mechanical and electrical applications, epoxy resin and E-
The permutations are nearly endless, with a wide variety of rein- glass roving are used for their high strength and durability [44]. Polar
forcement and matrix materials (metal, ceramic, or plastic). As a rule, a winding is the term used to describe the technique used. Exceptionally
composite material will have both a continuous phase and one or more robust, robust, and able to make incredibly complicated patterns while
discontinuous phases. Many distinct intermittent phases can be found in also being resistant to rust and rust. Alignment and dimensional stability
hybrid composites. Matrix =constant, reinforcement =supplementary are two features that can be preserved. The probability of dielectric
change. The most outstanding qualities of many materials are synthe- breakdown is minimal. The maximum possible level of efficiency is
sized into one composite synthetic. A polymer matrix’s mechanical and reached.
thermal properties can be enhanced using highly modular re- However, it’s essential to consider the potential downsides as well.
inforcements and extreme tension. The production of composites using a Delamination is the separation of laminate layers at the layer interface
polymer matrix provides greater design freedom than that of metals. due to mechanical stress, such as a blow or a drop in temperature. One or
Benefits include decreased fuel consumption (in airplanes and cars), more fibers may get detached from the matrix. A material must have the
increased range and payload for missiles, and faster timing in sports (in characteristics to be included in the first table. Due to their versatile
transport). Reinforced plastics, rubber, steel, organic resins, glass fibers, nature and array of valuable features, composites find use in various
carbon, and boron are all examples of inorganic composites (resins and fields. Composite materials are currently actively integrated into most
short fibers). Materials such as ceramic composites, carbon–carbon aerospace programs, and the image below shows how the benefits
composites (made from carbon and carbon fibers), and concrete (made greatly exceed any potential downsides. While experiencing a flurry of
from cement, sand, and additives) are all examples of mineral compos- hydraulic action. Subtle Disturbance to the Discrete Arrangement of
ites (ceramics and ceramic fibers). Another by-product is composite Parts. Problems with production are to be expected. The bearing
metals (formed, for example, from aluminum and carbon fibers or boron strength of composites is lower than that of metals. Fig. 4 displays car-
and aluminum fibers). Packaging, automobiles, light structures, civil bon fiber potential in 2017 [45–49].
engineering, aviation, sports, biomedicine, thermomechanical compo- The aerospace industry relied heavily on autoclaves since composites
nents, and aerospace are just a few fields that have benefited from were a primary raw material. Glass-fibre reinforced plastic (composites)
composites. are commonly used in low-speed aircraft. On the other hand, traditional
MMC machining is always unique; it is typically done apart from metal tooling is the way to go when mass-producing an identical item.
more popular and traditional metal and alloy types. MMCs are made of a Injection molding using resign works particularly well for producing
soft matrix (e.g., Mg, Al, Ni, C, Ti, etc.) and reinforced hard particles (e. complex shapes, such as randoms. A random act as a shield for elec-
g., SiC, Al2O3) to emphasize the natural progression of the material tromagnetic transmission, allowing it to travel farther with less atten-
removal process and impact manufacturing productivity. When uation [51]. A random two most crucial characteristics are a constant
machining MMCs, common occurrences include tool damage, abrupt electrical thickness and a wavelength compatible with the radar
breaking, excessive wear mechanism, a bad surface, and workpiece equipment it will use. Titanium and aluminum-based alloys are the first
quality degradation. The excessive rate of plastic deformation that oc- materials used to make aircraft. As we know, Carbon fiber reinforced
curs during the material removal process is what causes the significant composites (CFRC) were introduced to the aerospace industry to address
heat generation. Owing to the MMCs’ ambiguous structural integrity, a various issues such as lack of mechanical strength, complex shapes, fa-
variety of variables and procedures can be adjusted for a seamless ma- tigue, and fracture resistance. They also addressed static and dynamic
terial removal process. Therefore, the distribution of reinforcement for resistance, corrosion resistance, engine vibration reduction, higher rate
the MMCs portion during the fabrication process plays a crucial role in of fuel consumption, and more. After extensive research in this field, the
the produced structure and properties of the composite material. The relative strength of aluminum alloy (7075-T6) with CF-reinforced
selection of the cooling/lubrication procedure must be taken into ac- polyester composite and Ti-6Al-4 V were the most validated composite
count based on the cutting parameters. A number of writers have materials used in aerospace. All three components have excellent static,
embraced the sustainable machining method for handling materials that fatigue, and stress management efficiency [52–55].
are difficult to cut. During the milling process on high-density composite
materials, one can view an experimental example of the machining 4.2. Automobile and transportation industry
procedure. During the material removal process, the dense reinforce-
ment in the workpiece has the potential to fracture, harm the cutting Composite materials have garnered a lot of attention in the auto-
tool, and create surface fissures. The dynamics of the cutting process are motive and transportation industries due to the possibility of improved
altered when soft matrix materials and abrasive hard additives are MPG through decreased vehicle weight [56]. In industrialized countries
combined in composite materials. As a result, various machining tech- like Japan, graphite-dispersed aluminum composites are commonly
niques, such as dry, MQL, cryogenic, flood, or high-pressure flood used to make frictional auto parts. Composites are used extensively in
machining processes, must be used to counteract these obstacles. the automobile and railroad industries. Three-wheeled vehicles for the
disabled, taxis, delivery trucks, sports cars, ambulances, caravans, mo-
4. Application of composites bile shops, and more are all made with glass fiber-polyester epoxy
composites outside the United States. GRP is also used in the motorcycle
It is because composites have properties that set them apart from and scooter industries because of the need for lightweight, weather-
other materials. The capacity to be transported easily or a high strength- resistant, aerodynamic fairings. Several industries, such as maritime,
7M. Bhong et al. M a t e r i a l s T o d a y : P r o c e e dingsxxx(xxxx)xxx
Fig. 3. Sector-wise Composite Materials [44].
Fig. 4. Carbon Fiber Potential in 2017 [50].
chemical, mechanical, civil, electrical, and electronic, play essential researchers can focus on particular regions to make significant contri-
roles in the economy [57–60]. The future studies on composite materials butions to the field of composite materials.
ought to concentrate on a number of important topics. Automation and
additive manufacturing are two examples of advanced production sys- 5. Conclusions
tems that present chances for accuracy and efficiency. Investigation of
nanocomposites with characteristics enhanced by nanoparticles is war- Composites protect metal components in corrosive chemical condi-
ranted. Attention needs to be paid to raw material recycling and sus- tions like salt spray and acid rain, reducing maintenance costs. Com-
tainability. Studies on durability, biocomposites, and multifunctional posites possess shape memory and impact tolerance, making them
composites show promise. For progress, better characterization highly useful in transportation. Aluminum-based composites in vehicles
methods, simulation tools, and manufacturing process optimization are are more economical, fuel-efficient, and lightweight than steel or iron
essential. It is essential to evaluate environmental implications through counterparts. Combining two metal components into a composite
life cycle assessments. Collaborations across disciplines can tackle further saves weight and resources during setup. Composites and ad-
intricate problems in this developing sector. Within these paths, hesives/coatings are mutually compatible, offering additional benefits
8M. Bhong et al. M a t e r i a l s T o d a y : P r o c e e dingsxxx(xxxx)xxx
due to their shared polymer composition. Composites excel as insulators, [12] Raj, P. Prajul, R. Sridhar, R. Pugazhenthi, G. Anbuchezhiyan, and M. Ganesh.
maintaining form and performance even in low temperatures. “Investigating the mechanical properties of tungsten carbide metal matrix
composites with Al 6061.” Materials Today: Proceedings (2023).
[13] M. Ostolaza, J.I. Arrizubieta, A. Lamikiz, S. Plaza, N. Ortega, Latest Developments
• Composites open up a wide range of new design options without to manufacture metal matrix composites and functionally graded materials through
compromising performance or strength. AM: A state-of-the-art review, Materials 16 (4) (2023) 1746.
• Fiber-reinforced composites are ideal for electronics due to their high [14] J. Cao, F. Li, Q. Yang, K.e. Zhan, Z. Yang, Z. Wang, B. Zhao, A review on interfacial
structure optimization and its mechanism on the properties of carbon reinforced
resistance to heat and flame. metal-matrix composites, Compos. Interfaces 30 (5) (2023) 543–583.
• Innovative surface generation methods provide post-mold paint [15] A.K. Maurya, G. Manik, Advances towards development of industrially relevant
short natural fiber reinforced and hybridized polypropylene composites for various
finishes without extensive time and resource investment.
industrial applications: a review, J. Polym. Res. 30 (1) (2023) 47.
• Biomaterials using composites can heal damaged tissues and serve as [16] Dinbandhu, Thakur, A., Venugopal Goud, E., Abhishek, K., & Vora, J. J. (2021). An
replacements for organs, revolutionizing the biomedical industry. Overview of Proteus: The world’s First Man-Made Non-cuttable Material. Recent
• Aluminum-based composites offer affordability, fuel efficiency, and Advances in Smart Manufacturing and Materials: Select Proceedings of ICEM 2020,
95-102.
lightweight properties for vehicles and automobile parts. [17] A. Etale, A.J. Onyianta, S.R. Turner, S.J. Eichhorn, Cellulose: a review of water
• Composites reduce resource consumption, are compatible with ad- interactions, applications in composites, and water treatment, Chem. Rev. 123 (5)
(2023) 2016–2048.
hesives/coatings, and perform well at low temperatures.
[18] S.K. Sharma, K.K. Saxena, V. Malik, K.A. Mohammed, C. Prakash, D. Buddhi,
• Effective ways to create composites have led to indispensable ad- S. Dixit, Significance of alloying elements on the mechanical characteristics of Mg-
vancements in the biomedical field for wound healing and tissue based materials for biomedical applications, Crystals 12 (8) (2022) 1138.
engineering. [19] M. Abdur Rahman, S. Haque, M.M. Athikesavan, M.B. Kamaludeen, A review of
environmental friendly green composites: production methods, current progresses,
and challenges, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 30 (7) (2023) 16905–16929.
CRediT authorship contribution statement [20] A.E. Krauklis, C.W. Karl, A.I. Gagani, J.K. Jørgensen, Composite material recycling
technology—state-of-the-art and sustainable development for the 2020s,
J. Compos. Sci. 5 (1) (2021) 28.
Mahesh Bhong: Conceptualization. Tasneem K.H. Khan: Method- [21] P.S.S. Kumar, K.V. Allamraju, A review of natural fiber composites [Jute, Sisal,
ology. Kiran Devade: Supervision. B. Vijay Krishna: . Sreekanth Sura: Kenaf], Mater. Today: Proc. 18 (2019) 2556–2562.
Writing – original draft. H.K. Eftikhaar: . H. Pal Thethi: . Nakul [22] W. Zhou, Y. Tang, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, H. Xue, H. Pang, MOF derived metal oxide
composites and their applications in energy storage, Coord. Chem. Rev. 477
Gupta: . (2023), 214949.
[23] K.M. Agarwal, R.K. Tyagi, K.K. Saxena, Deformation analysis of Al Alloy AA2024
through equal channel angular pressing for aircraft structures, Adv. Mater. Process.
Technol. 8 (1) (2022) 828–842.
Declaration of Competing Interest [24] A. Haleem, A. Shafiq, S.Q. Chen, M. Nazar, A comprehensive review on adsorption,
photocatalytic and chemical degradation of dyes and nitro-compounds over
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial different kinds of porous and composite materials, Molecules 28 (3) (2023) 1081.
[25] W. Zhang, X.X. Ji, M.G. Ma, Emerging MXene/cellulose composites: Design
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence strategies and diverse applications, Chem. Eng. J. 458 (2023), 141402.
the work reported in this paper. [26] A.G. Korpi, S¸. T¸a˘lu, M. Bramowicz, A. Arman, S. Kulesza, B. Pszczolkowski,
S. Gopikishan, Minkowski functional characterization and fractal analysis of
surfaces of titanium nitride films, Mater. Res. Express 6 (8) (2019), 086463.
Data availability
[27] M.K. Egbo, A fundamental review on composite materials and some of their
applications in biomedical engineering, J. King Saud Univ.-Eng. Sci. 33 (8) (2021)
No data was used for the research described in the article. 557–568.
[28] A. Awasthi, K.K. Saxena, V. Arun, Sustainable and smart metal forming
manufacturing process, Mater. Today:. Proc. 44 (2021) 2069–2079.
References [29] A.D. Kandhare, P.A. Thakurdesai, P. Wangikar, S.L. Bodhankar, A systematic
literature review of fenugreek seed toxicity by using ToxRTool: evidence from
[1] M. Nachtane, M. Tarfaoui, M.A. Abichou, A. Vetcher, M. Rouway, A. Aaˆmir, preclinical and clinical studies, Heliyon 5 (4) (2019).
[30] X. Yu, A. Manthiram, A review of composite polymer-ceramic electrolytes for
H. Naanani, An overview of the recent advances in composite materials and lithium batteries, Energy Storage Mater. 34 (2021) 282–300.
artificial intelligence for hydrogen storage vessels design, J. Compos. Sci. 7 (3)
[31] P. Shi, X.Q. Zhang, X. Shen, R. Zhang, H. Liu, Q. Zhang, A review of composite
(2023) 119.
lithium metal anode for practical applications, Adv. Mater. Technol. 5 (1) (2020)
[2] V. Lunetto, M. Galati, L. Settineri, L. Iuliano, Sustainability in the manufacturing of
1900806.
composite materials: A literature review and directions for future research,
[32] G. Beniwal, K.K. Saxena, A review on pore and porosity in tissue engineering,
J. Manuf. Process. 85 (2023) 858–874. Mater. Today:. Proc. 44 (2021) 2623–2628.
[3] Q.J. Sun, Q.T. Lai, Z. Tang, X.G. Tang, X.H. Zhao, V.A. Roy, Advanced functional
[33] Y. Zheng, Y. Yao, J. Ou, M. Li, D. Luo, H. Dou, Z. Chen, A review of composite solid-
composite materials toward E-skin for health monitoring and artificial intelligence,
state electrolytes for lithium batteries: fundamentals, key materials and advanced
Adv. Mater. Technol. 8 (5) (2023) 2201088. structures, Chem. Soc. Rev. 49 (23) (2020) 8790–8839.
[4] A.R. Bhardwaj, A.M. Vaidya, P.D. Meshram, D. Bandhu, Machining behavior [34] Dinbandhu, Abhishek, K., Thakur, A., Nagaphani Sastry, M., Devaki Devi, K., &
investigation of aluminium metal matrix composite reinforced with TiC
particulates, Int. J. Interact. Des. Manuf. (IJIDeM) (2023) 1–15. Nishant, A. (2021). A study on mechanical attributes of epoxy-carbon fiber-
terminalia bellirica embedded hybrid composites. In Recent Advances in Smart
[5] I.L.P. Raj, S. Valanarasu, K. Hariprasad, J.S. Ponraj, N. Chidhambaram, V. Ganesh,
Manufacturing and Materials: Select Proceedings of ICEM 2020 (pp. 163-173).
Y. Khairy, Enhancement of optoelectronic parameters of Nd-doped ZnO nanowires
Springer Singapore.
for photodetector applications, Opt. Mater. 109 (2020), 110396. [35] M. Subramanian, A.T. Hoang, B. Kalidasan, S. Niˇzeti´c, J.M. Solomon,
[6] D. Zhang, W. Zhang, S. Zhang, X. Ji, L. Li, Synthesis of expanded graphite-based
D. Balasubramanian, X.P. Nguyen, A technical review on composite phase change
materials for application in lithium-based batteries, J. Storage Mater. 60 (2023),
material based secondary assisted battery thermal management system for electric
106678.
vehicles, J. Clean. Prod. 322 (2021), 129079.
[7] K. Zadafiya, D. Bandhu, S. Kumari, S. Chatterjee, K. Abhishek, Recent trends in
[36] K.K. Saxena, A. Lal, Comparative Molecular Dynamics simulation study of
drilling of carbon fiber reinforced polymers (CFRPs): A state-of-the-art review,
J. Manuf. Process. 69 (2021) 47–68. m vae cc ah na cn yi c da el f ep cr to sp , e Pr rt oie cs e do if a c Ear nb go . n 3 8n a (n 2o 0t 1u 2b )e 2s 3w 4i 7th – 2n 3u 5m 5.b er of stone-wales and
[8] H. Zhang, Z. Lin, Y. Hu, S. Ma, Y. Liang, L. Ren, L. Ren, Low-voltage driven ionic [37] R.A. Mitran, S. Ionit¸ǎ, D. Lincu, D. Berger, C. Matei, A review of composite phase
polymer-metal composite actuators: structures, materials, and applications, Adv.
change materials based on porous silica nanomaterials for latent heat storage
Sci. 10 (10) (2023) 2206135.
applications, Molecules 26 (1) (2021) 241.
[9] R.A. Laghari, N. He, M. Jamil, M.I. Hussain, M.K. Gupta, G.M. Krolczyk, A state-of-
[38] Witzel, O. (2019). Review on composite Higgs models. arXiv preprint arXiv:
the-art review on recently developed sustainable and green cooling/lubrication
1901.08216.
technologies in machining metal matrix composites (MMCs), Int. J. Precis. Eng.
Manuf.-Green Technol. (2023) 1–24. [39] C K.
.
JB aa ys aa sv aa np ko ao rr ,n Si pm ea c,
t
rC a. lR c.
h
K ae rasa ctv eu rl iu st, icT s. oM
f
a Ph re 3s +w -a dr oi p, eW
d
.
l
eP ae dc h ba ar sa ep da p, hS o.R sp. hD ae tp eu gr lu a,
s
sC e.
s
[10] K.K. Sadhu, N. Mandal, R.R. Sahoo, SiC/graphene reinforced aluminum metal
for optical display device applications, J. Lumin. 228 (2020), 117585.
matrix composites prepared by powder metallurgy: A review, J. Manuf. Process. 91
(2023) 10–43. [40] B. Wang, S. Zhong, T.L. Lee, K.S. Fancey, J. Mi, Non-destructive testing and
[11] Menachery, Nice, Shijo Thomas, B. Deepanraj, and N. Senthilkumar. “Processing of evaluation of composite materials/structures: A state-of-the-art review, Adv. Mech.
Eng. 12 (4) (2020).
nanoreinforced aluminium hybrid metal matrix composites and the effect of post-
heat treatment: a review.” Applied Nanoscience 13, no. 6 (2023): 4075-4099.
9M. Bhong et al. M a t e r i a l s T o d a y : P r o c e e dingsxxx(xxxx)xxx
[41] K.M. Agarwal, R.K. Tyagi, V. Choubey, K.K. Saxena, Mechanical behaviour of [52] S. Vinoth, G. Kanimozhi, K. Hari Prasad, K. Harish, E.S. Srinadhu,
Aluminium Alloy AA6063 processed through ECAP with optimum die design N. Satyanarayana, Enhanced ionic conductivity of electrospun nanocomposite
parameters, Adv. Mater. Process. Technol. 8 (2) (2022) 1901–1915. (PVDF-HFP+TiO2 nanofibers fillers) polymer fibrous membrane electrolyte for
[42] G. Kalpana, P.V. Kumar, S. Aljawarneh, R.V. Krishnaiah, Shifted adaption DSSC application, Polym. Compos. 40 (4) (2019) 1585–1594.
homomorphism encryption for mobile and cloud learning, Comput. Electr. Eng. 65 [53] C.V. More, Z. Alsayed, M.S. Badawi, A.A. Thabet, P.P. Pawar, Polymeric composite
(2018) 178–195. materials for radiation shielding: a review, Environ. Chem. Lett. 19 (2021)
[43] R. Hsissou, R. Seghiri, Z. Benzekri, M. Hilali, M. Rafik, A. Elharfi, Polymer 2057–2090.
composite materials: A comprehensive review, Compos. Struct. 262 (2021), [54] D. Bandhu, A. Thakur, R. Purohit, R.K. Verma, K. Abhishek, Characterization &
113640. evaluation of Al7075 MMCs reinforced with ceramic particulates and influence of
[44] N. Sahai, K.K. Saxena, M. Gogoi, Modelling and simulation for fabrication of 3D age hardening on their tensile behavior, J. Mech. Sci. Technol. 32 (2018)
printed polymeric porous tissue scaffolds, Adv. Mater. Process. Technol. 6 (3) 3123–3128.
(2020) 530–539. [55] A. Awasthi, U.S. Rao, K.K. Saxena, R.K. Dwivedi, Impact of equal channel angular
[45] B. Castanie, C. Bouvet, M. Ginot, Review of composite sandwich structure in pressing on aluminium alloys: An overview, Mater. Today:. Proc. 57 (2022)
aeronautic applications, Compos. Part c: Open Access 1 (2020), 100004. 908–912.
[46] A. Thakur, R. Purohit, R.S. Rana, D. Bandhu, Characterization and evaluation of [56] C.U. Kumari, A.S.D. Murthy, B.L. Prasanna, M.P.P. Reddy, A.K. Panigrahy, An
mechanical behavior of epoxy-CNT-bamboo matrix hybrid composites, Mater. automated detection of heart arrhythmias using machine learning technique: SVM,
Today:. Proc. 5 (2) (2018) 3971–3980. Mater. Today:. Proc. 45 (2021) 1393–1398.
[47] M.N. Bhukya, V.R. Kota, A quick and effective MPPT scheme for solar power [57] A.M. El-Khawaga, A. Zidan, A.I. Abd El-Mageed, Preparation methods of different
generation during dynamic weather and partial shaded conditions, Eng. Sci. nanomaterials for various potential applications: A review, J. Mol. Struct. 1281
Technol. Int. J. 22 (3) (2019) 869–884. (2023), 135148.
[48] M. Humayun, C. Wang, W. Luo, Recent progress in the synthesis and applications [58] V.D. Pon, K.J. Wilson, K. Hariprasad, V. Ganesh, H.E. Ali, H. Algarni, I.S. Yahia,
of composite photocatalysts: a critical review, Small Methods 6 (2) (2022) Enhancement of optoelectronic properties of ZnO thin films by Al doping for
2101395. photodetector applications, Superlattice. Microst. 151 (2021), 106790.
[49] A. Awasthi, K.K. Saxena, R.K. Dwivedi, An investigation on classification and [59] G. Upadhyay, K.K. Saxena, S. Sehgal, K.A. Mohammed, C. Prakash, S. Dixit,
characterization of bio materials and additive manufacturing techniques for D. Buddhi, Development of carbon nanotube (CNT)-reinforced mg alloys:
bioimplants, Mater. Today:. Proc. 44 (2021) 2061–2068. fabrication routes and mechanical properties, Metals 12 (8) (2022) 1392.
[50] M.K. Aslam, M. Xu, A mini-review: MXene composites for sodium/potassium-ion [60] M.S.B. Reddy, D. Ponnamma, R. Choudhary, K.K. Sadasivuni, A comparative
batteries, Nanoscale 12 (30) (2020) 15993–16007. review of natural and synthetic biopolymer composite scaffolds, Polymers 13 (7)
[51] H. Zhou, H. Li, L. Li, T. Liu, G. Chen, Y. Zhu, H. Huang, Structural composite energy (2021) 1105.
storage devices—a review, Mater. Today Energy 24 (2022), 100924.
10